AKSHYA  TRITIYA.
The  ceremony  peculiar  to  this  day,  if  per formed  three  days  before  Chaitra  the  30th (in  the  dark  half)  is  called  Pitru  Amavas; otherwise  the  proper  date  is  Vaisakh  Shudh the  third,  i.e.^  on  the  third  of  the  light  half of  the  month  of  Vaisakh.  In  the  Central Provinces,  people  perform  this  ceremony  either  on the  Pitru  Amavas,  or  on  the  Akshya  Tritiya  day itself,  which  is  the  proper  day.  ‘Akshya’ =  imperishable,  permanent,  stationary;  ‘Tritiya’ =  third. Vaisakh  Shudh  the  third  is  the  day  when  Sat  Jug  or Satya  Yuga — the  Period  of  Truth — began,  and  this day  is  kept  as  the  anniversary.  In  Hindu  mythology, it  is  the  day  of  the  beginning  of  our  world;  and  the end  is  not  far  away,  for  we  are  living  in  Kaliyuga, the  age  of  corruption  and  of  sin,  injustice,  and  in fidelity. Even  the  man  in  the  street  is  well  acquainted with  this  yuga.  When  he  affirms  that  the  world  is in  a  bad  way,  he  says:  “it  is  no  wonder,  for  we  are living  in  Kaliyuga”;  as  if  men  are  not  responsible for  their  conduct  and  are  helpless  in  the  matter  and it  is  the  times  that  are  to  answer  in  the  sight  of  God, for  the  daily  life  of  human  beings  !
Vaisakh  Shudh  the  third  is  the  anniversary  of the  day  when  the  Satya  Yuga  began;  but  in  the Central  Provinces  or  in  Maharashtra,  Akshya  Tritiya is  observed  as  the  anniversary  day  of  Tretiya  Yuga.
Before  proceeding  to  record  how  the  Akshya Tritiya  is  actually  observed  by  the  common  people, it  would  be  good  to  say  something  about  Parasrama (Rama-with-the-axe).  He  was  a  Brahmin  by  caste, and  son  of  the  sage  Jamadagni.  He  killed  his  mother Renuka  for  her  sinful  life,  though  she  was  restored to  life  and  purified  by  her  husband.  The  son  was blessed  with a long  life  for  killing  a  sinner.
Parasrama’s  one  object  in  life  was  to  clear  the earth  of  the  Kshatriyas.  He  got  his  chance  once when  their  king  raided  the  forest  dwelling  of  a  sage and  made  his  worship  impossible  by  carrying  away the  calf  of  the  cow  whose  milk  he  used  to  use  in  his worship.  The  sage  took  revenge  by killing  him. The  sage  in  turn  was  killed  by  the  king’s  son. Parasrama  therefore  rose  in  great  wrath  and  cleared the  Kshatriyas  off  the  face  of  the  earth.
There  is  another  version  of  the  struggle  of Parasrama  against  the  Kshatriyas.  Ic  is  said  that with  his  axe  he  cut  off  the  arms  of  one  Rajah Sahasrabahu  (Sahasra  =  1,000,  Bahu  =  Arms)  twenty- one  times,  and  every  time  they  immediately  grew up  again  though  eventually  the  Rajah  died.  Including  these  twenty-one  fights  Parasram  defeated  the Kshatriyas  altogether  thirty-six  times,  and  it  was  at the  thirty-seventh  time  that  he  himself  was  defeated and  consequently  retired  honourably  into  the  Ma- hendra  mountain,  where  he  still  lives  as  the  patron God  of  the  Chitpavan  Brahmins.
Another  story  is,  that  when  in  the  Court  of Rajah  Janak,  where  the  great  princes  and  kings, including  Ravan,  the  king  of  Lanka,  had  gathered together  to  try  their  luck  for  the  hand  of  Sita,  his daughter,  Ravan  seeing  that  Ramchandra  had  broken the  bow — the  condition  of  gaining  the  hand  of  Sita — out  of  jealousy,  induced  Parasrama  to  fight  with Ramchandra;  but  Shiva,  the  Mahadeo,  in  the  mean time  handed  over  a  Dhanus  (a  bow)  to  Parasrama to  challenge  Ramchandra  to  string  it  (it  requires a  great  deal  of  strength  to  string  a  big,  thick  bow) saying  that  if  he  did  so,  Parasrama  must  consider himself  defeated  for  the  first  and  the  last  time  and admit  Ramchandra  as  an  Avatar  or  incarnation  of God  (Vishnu).  Ramchandra,  however,  accepted the  challenge  and  accomplished  the  task  quickly and  Parasrama  had  to  retire  from  the  field.
There  is  yet  another  story  which  shows  the importance  of  Vaisakh  the  third.  Bhagirath,  a Kahatriya  king,  wanted  to  get  all  his  relatives absolved  from  sin,  and  as  he  knew  that  his  relatives had  neither  the  courage  nor  the  strength  to  do penance  for  their  own  salvation,  he  undertook  on himself  to  do  all  the  necessary  penance  on  their behalf,  in  order  to  excite  the  admiration  or  pity  of the  God  to  send  down  the  river  Ganges  for  the  purpose of  enabling  the  relatives  to  bathe  in  it  and  get  absolved,  and  thus  saved  from  their  sins.  So  according  to his  determination  he  underwent  twelve  years  long and  rigorous  penance,  and  sent  up  his  prayers  and supplications  to  God  Shiva  in  heaven,  who  eventually  did  take  pity  on  him,  and  heard  his  prayers. As  Shiva  knew  that  Bhagirath  would  not  be  able to  stand  the  tremendous  flow  of  the  river  on  his head  he  himself  came  down  from  heaven  and  received  the  river  on  the  long  hair  of  his  head,  from which  it  flowed  down  to  earth.
In  common  parlance,  the  name  of  Bhagirath is  generally  brought  in  as  an  example  of  one  who makes  tenacious  efforts.  His  name  is  symbolic  of tenacity  and  determination.
On  this  day  people  invite  Brahmins  and  feed them  with  the  choicest  food,  and  also  give  them  fans, earthenwares,  shoes,  cloth,  a  little  money  and  the fruits  of  the  season,  in  order  to  get  the  same  favours at  the  hands  of  the  gods,  when  they  themselves depart  for  the  heavens  on  their  death.  So  it  was on  Vaisakh  Shudh  the  third,  that  the  Ganges  was brought  to  earth  from  heaven ;  and  that  is  why generally  people  go  and  bathe  in  the  Ganga;  because they  commonly  believe  that  their  sins  are  forgiven by  simply  taking  a  bath  in  the  river.  This  day, moreover,  is  considered  a  very  auspicious  one.
Pilgrims  who  return  after  taking  an  ashnan  (bath) in  the  Ganga  bring  along  with  them  bottles  and  even pitchers  filled  with  water,  nicely  sealed  up,  in  order that  not  a  single  drop  of  the  precious  contents  may be  wasted.  The  young  bride  keeps  it  in  a  bottle  in her  wedding  clothes,  and  regards  it  as  precious  as her  jewellery,  any  more  than  that.  She  would  rather lose  her  clothes  or  jewellery,  than  the  ‘Ganga  Jali’ — the  water  of  Ganga.  It  is  generally  kept  in  a  niche, above  the  reach  of  children’s  hands,  or  stored  away in  a  box  under  lock  and  key.  It  is  kept  in  the house  for  its  own  sake,  being  a  purifier ;  secondly, for  puja  (worship) ;  thirdly,  as  the  author  has  often seen  it,  to  put  a  few  drops  in  a  glass  of  Persian sherbet  offered  to  a  friend  or  to  a  loved  one.  It  is not  only  disposed  of  in  the  above  ways,  but  it  is also  sold  to  those  who  are  either  too  old  or  too  poor to  undertake  a  journey  to  fetch  it  for  themselves. A  great  peculiarity  of  this  water  is  that  it  never stagnates,  but  always  keeps  fresh,  no  matter  for how  long.  Is  this  because  it  is  mixed  with  the  dust of  the  millions  of  the  dead,  whose  grave  yard  this river  is  ?
In  the  Central  Provinces,  a third  of  Vaisakh  is observed  in  a  different  manner.  The  day  is  reserved for  doing  something  which  is  instrumental  in  giving shanti  (peace)  to  the  souls  of  parents  who  are  dead. For  this  ceremony,  the  Brahmins  are  called  in  to  be worshipped.  One  day  before  this  day,  an  oral  invitation  to  them  is  sent  through  one  of  the  families. Or the  head  of  the  family  goes  and  extends  it  personally, and  says  that  his  meal  will  be  served  at  a  particular time.  The  ceremony  of  feeding  is  generally  performed  in  the  forenoon,  and  never  after  four  o’clock in  the  afternoon.  It  should  never  be  done  in  the dark.  If  both  the  father  and  the  mother  of  the  man are  dead,  he  invites  a  Brahmin  and  his  wife.  If  his mother  only  is  dead,  then  he  calls  any  old  Brahmin woman  for  the  meal — a  young  one,  of  course,  will not  come  !  If  father  is  living,  and  mother  and  wife both  are  dead,  then  he  generally  calls  one  Brahmin woman  for  both  of  them,  though  two  women  are  also called — one  for  mother  and  another  for  wife.  The man  is  not  supposed  to  do  anything  for  his  wife, as  from  a  religious  point  of  view  the  man’s  son  is the  only  one  who  is  really  responsible  for  this.  It is  as  a  matter  of  courtesy  that  the  husband  calls  in a  Brahmin  woman  for  her  too.  The  Brahmin  and his  wife,  when  invited  on  this  occasion,  sit  at  meals together,  contrary  to  the  age-long  convention  of  wife’s taking  her  nails  after  the  husband  has  finished.
The  place  where  the  Brahmin  is  asked  to  be seated  is  nicely  plastered  over  with  fine  cow-dung mixed  with  a  little  earth. It  is  printed  over  with various  kinds  of  white  designs  made  by  filling  a perforated  tin  plate  with  powdered  chalk,  and  then gently  striking  it  against  the  ground.
As  soon  as  the  Brahmin  sits  down,  one  red earthenware  pitcher,  in  the  name  of  the  father,  and one  small  ‘gadwa’  (an  earthenware  pitcherlike  utensil — with  a  hole  in  the  side)  in  the  name  of  the  mother are  filled  with  fresh  water  and  brought  in.  The  hole in  the  side  of  the  small  ‘gadwa’  does  not  signify anything  in  particular,  but  is  made  as  a  matter  of ‘dastur’  or  custom.
The  pitcher  is  kept  on  a  big  leaf  or  on  many leaves  of  dhak  (Frondosa  Bretea)  sewn  together, — and  on  the  top  of  it  is  kept  the  small  ‘gadwa.  On the  leaf  are  placed  all  the  different  kinds  of  nice things  made  that  morning;  or  rather,  they  are  placed round  the  pitcher.  The  head  of  the  family  then proceeds  with  the  regular  worship  of  the  earthenware and  of  the  Brahmin.  He  throws  some  rice  on  the utensils,  besmears  them  with  red  powder,  throws flowers  on  them  and  marks  them  with  sandalwood paste  As  he  does  this,  he  speaks  to  this  effect: “I  am  doing  this  thing  for  the  sake  of  my  parents, for  the  peace  and  comfort  of  their  souls,  etc.”  After it  he  takes  a  little  of  each  eatable  that  has  been placed  round  the  pitcher,  puts  it  on  the  leaf,  and makes  it  into  a  morsel  which  he  gently  sprinkles over  the  pitcher  with  the  help  of  some  mantras. He  then  takes  a  brass  plate,  which  contains  all  the materials  of  worship  and  has  in  it  also  a  receptacle of  kneaded  flour  burning  a  cotton  wick  in  clarified butter.  He  takes  it  up  and  waves  it  in  front  of  the pitchers  which  are  kept  one  over  the  other.  He  bows to  them  and  to  the  Brahmin  with  folded  hands.
This  done,  the  host  proceeds  to  make  arrangements  for  the  Brahmin’s  food  ;  the  Brahmin  has come  after  having  his  bath  at  home  and  clad  in  a single  piece  cloth  wrapped  round  his  loins,  the  proper dress  for  taking  his  food.  The  host  spreads  a  big leaf  in  front  of  the  Brahmin,  and  on  it  he  puts  all the  choicest  things  which  the  ladies  of  the  house have  been  able  to  prepare.  It  may  be  mentioned that  the  members  of  the  family  do  not  taste  anything until  the  Brahmin  has  partaken  of  it  first  as  otherwise  it  would  be  considered  as  ‘jhuta’  (the  remnant or  the  ‘left  over’)  and  it  would  not  be  considered  as the  first  offering.  In  fact,  even  the  head  of  the
family  has  to  keep  fast  until  the  Brahmin  has  had
his  fill.  The  Brahmin  is  given  water  to  drink  out of  the  two  pitchers  which  are  (brand)  new — • Kora — and  never  used  before.  Lying  in  front  of  the Brahmin  are  things  which  are  not  only  the  results  of labour  of  the  whole  morning  but  of  days  together. Men  go  beyond  their  means  to  have  as  many,  and as  nice  things  as  possible ;  the  sole  object  is  to  please the  Brahmin;  the  more  he  is  pleased  the  better  for the  souls  of  the  departed.  The  feeding  of  the
Brahmin  is  understood  to  be  doing  no  good  to  him
beyond  pleasing  him;  but  it  is  believed  that the more  he likes  the  dish  and  the  more  he  has,  the  more  will  the departed  be  satisfied.  It  will  relieve  the  misery  of the  soul.  As  far  as  the  belief  in  quantity  is  concerned  it  may  be  put  down  for  the  reader’s  benefit that  there  are  a  certain  kind  of  Brahmins  found  in certain  parts  of  India  who  may  conveniently  be termed  as  ‘professional  eaters’.  If  such  a  Brahmin is  invited  to  a  feast  he  after  having  his  fill  is  pressed to  eat  more.  He  refuses  to  do  so;  but  the  host  offers him  one  anna  for  each  laddu  (sweetmeat  balls)  eaten. After  eating  two  or  three  he  stops  again.  He  is offered  four  annas  a  piece,  then  eight  annas,  one rupee,  five  rupees,  ten  rupees  a  piece,  ultimately  one asharfi — one  pound — for  a  piece  I. He  has  by  this  time probably  finished  off  quite  a  large  quantity  of  sweets, and  not  to  speak  of  the  handsome  fee.  Further,  the feast  may  be  brought  to  him  and  not  he  to  the  feast, for  he  is  probably  too  fat.  and  too  unwieldy  to  move about  1
This,  however,  has  been  a  digression.  The Brahmin  has  in  front  of  him  sweets  of  many  kinds, special  dishes  of  diverse  kinds,  puris  and  kachauris, ghewars  and  pappers  and  what  nots.  The  ladies have  spent  days preparing  these  things,  simply in  the  hope  of  pleasing  their  departed  ones.  After the  Brahmin  has  finished  his  breakfast,  he  is  offered a  nice  ‘pan’  wrapped  in  pure  silver  leaf,  which  he begins  chewing  at  once  and  the  man  then  garlands him,  and  marks  him  on  his  forehead  with  sandalwood paste ;  and  marks  stripes  of  mixed  sandalwood  and kasturi  paste  on  his  wrists  for  coolness,  for  fragrance and  to  please  him  generally.  Then  the  ladies  of  the house  who  have  stayed  inside  all  the  time  sending out  this  and  that,  now  come  out  and  with  folded hands  bow  before  him  and  before  the  pitchers.  He then  rises  up  and  blesses  the  family  and  says  that he  is  well  satisfied  with  the  whole  arrangement  and that  he  has  had  his  fill  of  things  given  him  for  the purpose  of  satisfying  and  pleasing  the  souls  of  the departed  ones.  ‘What  else  do  they  want  ?  Isn't this  all  that  they  wanted  ?’  He  blesses  them  again and  starts  out.  He  is  given  money  also,  and  in many cases  the  pitchers  too ;  but  if  not  they  are  used  at home.  The  fruits  of  the  season  must  be  offered  to please  the  dead.  Melons,  water-melons  are  the fruits  most  often  seen  at  this  ceremony,  as  they  are generally  found  in  the  markets  during  these  days. They  are  cut  and  placed  on  the  top  of  the  pitchers, either  to  be  eaten  after  the  meals,  or  carried  away by  the  priest.
In  one  of  the  North-West  Frontier  towns,  the author  observed  that  all  the  worshippers  came  out of  their  houses  and  sat  by  the  side  of  a  small  stream or  a  tiny  canal,  running  in  front  of  their  houses. They  had  new  small  pitchers  filled  up  with  fresh water,  covered  up  with  hand-fans,  on  the  top  of  which were  seen  melons  cut  into  pieces.  They  were  all sitting  in  a  line,  each  worshipper  having  a  Brahmin sitting  by  and  reciting  some  mantras.  Though  in the  Central  Provinces  the  women  were  not  conspicuous  near  the  place  of  worship. There  the  women were  observed  to  be  taking  part  in  the  pujah  itself.
In  North-West  India,  on  this  day  the  Brahmin is  given  the  hand-fan  and  the  earthenware,  etc., but  in  the  Central  Provinces  these  things,  except  the pitchers,  are  not  generally  given on this  day.  On  the anniversary  of  the  death-day  of  the  deceased,  the Brahmin  of  the  family  is  called  and  given  an  um brella,  a  suit  of  clothes,  a  pair  of  shoes,  a  fan  or  any other  useful  thing  of  the  kind,  and  also  the  fruits  of the  season.  Just  as  feeding  of  the  Brahmin  appeases the  appetite  and  quenches  the  thirst  of  the  departed one  the  giving  of  the  above  mentioned  things  benefits the  deceased  in  his  journey  in  heaven  in  a  similar manner.  Surely  the  deceased  requires  a  new  pair  of shoes  every  now  and  then  ;  for  there  are  no  cobblers in  heaven  if  they  require  mending  and  an  umbrella for  the  Sun  in  heaven,  otherwise  how  tedious  would the  journey  be  !
Among  Mahars,  low  caste  Hindus,  the  Akshya Tritiya  day  is  observed  on  the  same  principle,  but  in a  different  manner.  They  prepare  nice  dishes  and keep  them  on  big  leaves.  They  all  sit  down  on  a specially  plastered  ground  in  the  order  of  seniority, the  senior  one  nearest  the  food  and  he  being  the head  of  the  family,  mixes  all  the  things  together. As  no  Brahmin  acts  as  a  priest  for  them,  they themselves  perform  all  the  necessary  Pujah  which is  naturally  greatly  modified,  and  is  simpler.  When bowing  and  folding  of  hands,  etc.,  is  finished  they all — both  men  and  women  (mark  this  distinctive feature  here) — hold  each  other’s  hand  in  order  to show  that  the  relatives,  one  and  all,  are  anxious  to do  something  for  the  soul  of  the  departed.  After this  the  head  of  the  family  calls  out  to  the  crows, “caw,  caw,  caw,”  until  a  few  crows  turn  up;  and  as you  know,  one  has  not  long  to  wait  for  them.  He then  throws,  or  rather  places,  the  mixed  eatables on  the  roof,  and  allows  the  crows  to  eat  them  unmolested.  It  is  believed  that  by  feeding  the  crows  the departed  ones  are  gratified  in  the  same  manner  as when  Brahmins  are  fed;  even  apart  from  their  being taken  as  substitutes  for  Brahmins,  they  are  capable of  transmitting  that  satisfaction  independently. They  are  considered  veritable  messengers  of  the  dead. When  the  food  has  been  given  out  to  the  crows, those who  are  ‘left  behind’  speak  a  few  messages  for  those who  have  gone  before.  It  is  not  only  the  Mahars alone  that  feed  the  crows  on  this  occasion,  but  some Brahmins  also  have  been  observed  to  do  the  same ; so  feeding  the  crows  is  not  necessarily  a  substitute for  feeding  the  Brahmins.  Besides  pappar  and chichuni,  the  other  dishes  made  are  quite  chatpatti — very  appetising — consisting  of  savoury  and  acid things,  pepper  and  other  spices.  When  feeding  the Brahmin,  the  main  idea  is  to  please  him  by  offering him  very  tasty  dishes ;  but  among  the  Mahars  the The main  idea  is  to  prepare  those  eatables  which  were greatly  relished  by  the  deceased  when  alive.  The author  saw  the  country  wine  also  being  poured  on  the roof — 'Sometimes  mixed  with  food — simply  because when  he  (or  she)  was  living  he  used  to  drink,  the underlined  idea  being  to  gratify  the  soul  with  the material  comforts  of  this  world.
Dogs  are  also  fed,  especially  black  ones.  They, along  with  crows,  are  regarded  as  ones  of  the  court of  Yama,  the  God  of  Death.
In  the  case  of  the  Mahars  at  least,  the  ceremony is  not  performed  in  a  very  serious  manner.  If  the crows  do  not  come  at  the  man’s  call,  the  neighbours make  some  funny  remarks, — “They  (the  crows)  won’t come  as  the  wines  are  not  offered  first!”  “They do  not  like  your  food;  they  will  come  to  us!”  “They will  get  ‘Bital’  if  they  touch  your  food  !”  and  so  on; until  the  man  begins  to  abuse  the  crows  most profusely  to  the  great  amusement  of  the  neighbours. But  the  performers  themselves  go  through  the ceremony  in  a  most  light-hearted  way.  They  give the  impression  that  they  have  to  perform  a  very pleasant  ceremony.
  A  temporary  or  permanent  ostracism,  revoked  only  by a  Peavy  fine  or  grand  feast,  which  is  almost  always  beyond  the capacity  of  the  victim  to  pay.








