DATTA  JAYANTI
(Vindication  of  Anusiya)
ON  the  full-moon  day  of  the  month  of  Marga- shirsh  falls on the  birthday  of  the  god  Datta. He  was  supposed  to  have  been  born  at Akhalkop  in  Maharashtra  where  a  temple built  for  him  contains  impressions  of  his  footprints chiselled  on  slabs  of  stones.  These  footprints  are worshipped  on  different  occasions  of  the  year, especially  when  fairs  are  held  in  his  honour.  There are  one  or  two  other  places  in  the  Western  India where  Datta  has  temples  to  his  name,  but  ordinarily people  worship  him  or  observe  his  birthday  at  home. He  is  practically  unknown  in  any  other  part  of India.
The  story  of  his  birth  throws  some  light  on the  human  side  of  the  gods.  The  three  greatest  gods, Shiva,  Vishnu  and  Brahma,  live  up  in  the  heavens together  with  their  wives.  Shiva  is  the  Destroyer, while  Vishnu  is  the  Protector  and  Preserver  of mankind  and  Brahma  is  the  Creator.  The  name of  Shiva’s  wife  is  Parvati,  of  Vishnu’s  wife  Lakshmi, and  Saraswati  is  the  wife  of  Brahma.  One  day, Vishnu  happened  to  mention  to  his  wife  (or  perhaps to  all  the  three  ladies)  that  Anusiya,  the  wife  of  the sage  Atari,  was  the  most  virtuous  woman  on  the face  of  the  earth,  and  indeed,  the  best  in  the  whole universe.  When  the  ladies  heard  this,  they  felt jealous  and  began  to  think  of  a  plan  by  which  they might  be  able  to  belittle  her  in  the  eyes  of  their husbands  as  well  as  of  the  whole  world,  and  might be  able  to  convince  their  husbands  that  they  three were  the  only  women  who  remained  unsurpassed in  goodness  and  beauty  of  character.  One  day, the  gods,  after  giving  some  time  to  the  affairs  of this  world,  and  the  ladies  their  household  affairs, sat  down  to  play  Chauper  or  Chauser^  the  wives on  one  side  and  the  husbands  on  the  other.  The  bet was  that  whichever  party  lost  in  the  game  would have  to  give  a  pledge  to  the  winning  party  to  carry out  any  request  which  they  might  ask  them  to perform.  As  luck  would  have  it,  the  ladies  won, and  the  gods  were  all  attention.  The  ladies  asked the  triad  to  go  down  to  the  earth  and do something  to  bring  dishonour  on  the  good  Anusiya. The  gods  were  sad  when  they  heard  it  and  knew not  what  to  do.  But  they  had  to  make  good  their promise,  and  therefore  set  out  on  their  mission immediately.  They  disguised  themselves  as  Sadhus or  mendicants  and  approached  Anusiya’s  door  and begged  for  grains.  Unfortunately  her  grains  had been  finished  that  very  day,  and  she  had  therefore none  in  the  house  to  give  and  her  husband  was  away from  home  at  that  time.  Being  a  true  devotee, she  felt  ashamed  that  she  could  not  give  shiksha, or  alms  to  the  Sadhus  who  had  come  in  the  name of  God ;  as  even  now  no  beggar  is  turned  away from  a  Hindu’s  house  without  receiving  some  alms. She  prayed  to  Vishnu  to  have  mercy  on  her  and give  her  some  grains  to  bestow  on  the  Sadhus,  not knowing  that  Vishnu  himself  was  one  of  the  mendicants.  As  she  was  a  woman  of  great  faith,  Vishnu, who  being  a  god,  was  everywhere,  and  had  one  ‘self in heaven  also,  heard  her  prayers  ;  and  lo,  her whole  house  was  immediately  full  of  grains.  Piles upon  piles  of  grain  bags  were  found  lying  everywhere  in  the  house.  When  she  saw  them,  she thanked  God  and  asked  the  Sadhus  waiting  outside to  take  away  as  much  grain  as  they  wanted. Thereupon  the  gods  felt  ashamed  of  what  they  had done  to  test  her  virtue  at  a  time  when  she  had  no grains  in  her  house  to  give  them,  and  they  returned to  heaven  more  fully  convinced  of  her  virtue  and goodness  and  faith  and  reported  the  matter  to  the ladies  accordingly.  When  the  three  goddesses  heard it,  they  were  full  of  wrath,  and  they  now  took  it upon  themselves  to  bring  dishonour  and  a  bad  name on  Anusiya.
Without  the  knowledge  of  their  husbands  they slipped  away  from  heaven  quietly  and  came  to the  earth  to  do  what  they  could  to  serve  their  end.

They  alighted  on  the  bank  of  a  river  which  flowed in  front  of  Anusiya’s  house,  and  there  Lakshmi took  the  form  of  a  very  young  girl,  and  Saraswati turned  herself  into  a  middle-aged  woman,  and Parvati  became  an  old  woman  of  eighty.  The  two women  threw  the  young  girl  into  the  stream  and raised  a  great  hue  and  cry  and  shouted  for  help. The  young  girl,  of  course,  could  not  be  drowned  ; for  being  really  a  goddess,  she  Was  light  and  aerial in  weight  I  However,  when  Anusiya  heard  the crying  and  wailing,  she  immediately  ran  to  the  scene, and  without  wasting  a  second,  jumped  into  the  water and  saved  the  child.  When  the  goddesses  saw this,  they  were  ashamed  and  rose  up  and  went back  to  heaven  crest-fallen!
But  they  were  not  appeased  and  wanted  to try  yet  once  more.  This  time  they  sent  down their  husbands  again  in  the  form  of  three  Brahmins, dressed  like  Shankar  Achariya,  as  great  devotees of  God.  On  hearing  their  voices,  Anusiya  came  to the  door  and  found  herself  face  to  face  with  the three  Brahmin  priests,  and  immediately  bowed before  them  with  clasped  hands  and  waited  for  any order  they  might  have  to  give.  They  demanded food  to  be  served  to  them  immediately  as  they  were hungry.  She  was  extremely  happy  to  hear  it  as naturally  she  felt  greatly  honoured  by  their  visit. But  after  hearing  a  happy  assent  from  her  they made  one  condition  which  was  apparently  quite impossible,  and  that  was  that  she  should  prepare their  food  without  her  clothes  on  and  serve  it  to them  in  the  same  manner,  quite  naked.  She was  very  sorry  to  hear  it  but  had  to  consent to  it  eventually  as  the  Brahmins  said  that  if  she would  not  feed  them  they  would  die  of  hunger  and the  guilt  of  murder  would  be  on  her.  Now  no  sin is  so  great  as  the  killing  of  a  Brahmin.  One  might kill  so  many  other  men  and  women  and  cows  even, yet  the  sin  would  not  be  so  hideous  as  the  killing of  one  Brahmin  I  However,  she  trusted  in  God  and prayed  that  He  might  save  her  from  this  ordeal.
It  might  be  mentioned  that  their  intention was  to  tackle  her  again  as  before  in  her  husband's absence  who  was  away  at  the  river  for  his  bath. (A  Hindu  is  supposed  to  take  a  bath  three  times a  day;  first,  at  the  rising  of  the  sun;  secondly,  at noon,  and  thirdly,  at  sunset,  just  when  the  sun is  setting.  He  has  to  recite  some  mantras  every time  in  worship  of  the  sun,  facing  it  and  taking a  little  water  in  the  joined  palms  of  two  hands,  and letting  it  flow  down.  He  can  do  this  ‘throwing of  the  water  as  many  times  as  he  likes).  So Anusiya’s  husband,  before  he  left  home,  had  done this  ceremony  at  home,  and  then  had  gone  to  the river  to  take  his  bath.  Ordinarily  when  this ‘throwing  of  the  water  is  done  at  home,  the  water is  generally  dropped  into  the  sacred  Tulsi  plant  which every  Hindu  keeps  in  his  house.  If  at  the  time of  the  oblations  the  plant  is  not  near  or  is  not in  the  house,  this  water  can  be  collected  in  a flat  copper  basin  in  order  to  prevent  the  ground in  the  house  from  getting  muddy.  It  was  for  this reason  that  Anusiya  had  collected  the  water  of oblation  in  a  flat  basin  which  had  been  left  unemptied  by  her  husband.
To  resume  the  thread  of  our  narrative:  when Anusiya  found  herself  in  this  predicament,  she  suggested  to  the  Brahmins  to  go  to  the  river  and  take  a bath  as  they  usually  do  before  taking  food  and  in the  meantime  she  would  get  their  food  cooked  and ready  to  serve.  After  they  departed,  she  stripped herself  of  her  clothes  and  began  cooking  the  food, and  before  they  returned  she  had  not  only  cooked everything  but  had  ‘laid  the  table  also,  smearing the  floor  with  a  mixture  of  mud  and  cowdung  and drawing  different  designs  in  chalk,  and  placing  for them  three  big  leaves  in  row  from  which  to  take their  food.  When  everything  was  ready,  she  put  on her  clothes  and  awaited  their  arrival.  It  was  in the  afternoon  that  they  arrived.  She  made  them  sit  in their  proper  places,  and  they  sat  stripped  of  all clothes  except  the  loin  cloth — the  common  way  in which  Brahmins  take  their  food.  Now  as  the  time of  serving  the  food  drew  nigh  she  prayed  to  god Vishnu  to  protect  her,  and  suggest  to  her  the  means whereby  she  might  be  able  to  circumvent  their  plot, and  not  be  required  to  be  naked  in  front  of  these grown-up  men.  As  she  prayed  she  took  some  water in  her  hand  from  the  basin  containing  the  oblation water  left  over  by  her  husband,  and  sprinkled  it in  the  name  of  the  god  Vishnu  on  the  three  men sitting  in  a  row.  No  sooner  had  the  water  touched them  than  they  turned  into  young  infants.  She took  off  her  clothes  now  without  feeling  embarrassed, and  as  the  infants  could  not  take  the  food  of  grown up  men,  she  put  them  on  to  her  own  breasts  which were  immediately  filled  with  milk  at  the  sight  of the  children.
The  sage  Narad  keeps  wandering  about  in  the universe  constantly,  and  is  the  messenger  of  gods and  adviser  of  human  beings.  He  is  considered  by some  to  be  the  son  of  the  God  Brahma  also.  Now when  he  found  that  the  three  great  gods  were  in the  house  of  Anusiya  sucking  her  breasts  in  the form  of  babies  he  went  up  in  haste,  and  informed their  respective  wives  of  the  scandal.  The  wives immediately  descended  to  the  earth  in  great consternation.  When  they  questioned  Anusiya and  demanded  their  husbands,  she  was  greatly shocked  to  know  what  she  had  done,  and  fell  on her  face  and  craved  their  pardon  saying  that  she was  totally  unaware  of  the  fact  that  they  were  their husbands.  However  she  suggested  that  as  the  children  had  sucked  her  breasts  they  should  be  left  with her  and  to  be  brought  up  by  her,  she  being  childless. Of  course,  this  was  unacceptable  to  the  goddesses and  also  to  the  gods!  Anusiya  then  asked  the  god dresses  to  pick  up  their  own  husbands — a  thing  which they  wanted  to  do  immediately;  but  they  were  confused  as  the  three  children  were  alike  in  all  respects and  they  could  not  say  which  was  which.  So  they had  to  leave  it  to  luck.  When  each  one  picked  up a  child  it  grew  up  into  a  full-sized  man,  and  each lady  found  herself  with  another’s  husband;  and  as a  result  there  was  lot  of  confusion  and  blushing  on the  part  of  the  goddesses  1  However  when  they resumed  their  original  forms,  they  promised  to  let Anusiya  have  a  child  if  she  wanted  one — a  child which  would  be  made  of  the  combined  Shakti  or power  of  the  three.  On  her  agreeing  with  the  pro posal  the  three  gods  immediately  made  contribution of  their  respective  Shaktisand  they  produced  a  child which  was  named  Datta,  signifying  ‘that  which  happens  in  the  twinkling  of  the  eye,  something  ‘at once  and  ’immediate;  and  this  because  Datta  was created  by  a  quick  and  spontaneous  action.  This creation  of  Datta  took  place  exactly  at  12  o'clock noon.  So  the  three  were  concentrated  in  one,  and the  result  was  the  birth  of  a  child  having  three faces,  one  trunk,  four  hands  and  two  feet.  He became  on  earth  thus  the  incarnation  of  the  three highest  gods  of  heavens,  who  along  with  their  wives were  fully  satisfied  by  the  virtue  of  Anusiya,  and  her reputation  as  a  virtuous  woman  remained  forever undisputed.
This  child  grew  up  in  great  wisdom,  ability  and learning,  so  much  so  that  in  course  of  time  he  became transformed  into  a  god  and  is  now  worshipped  as such.  He  was  a  great  wanderer.  In  one  day  he would  be  in  two  or  three  different  parts  of  India, taking  his  bath  at  one  place,  his  food  at  another,  and his  rest  at  a  third  place,  these  stations  being  as  far apart  as  Benares  in  the  north  and  Kolhapur  in southern  Mahratta  country.  The  name  Dattareya — Datta,  son  of  Atareya — is  commonly  used  to  express the  wanderings  of  a  man  who  is  always  on  the  move as  ‘Dattareya  ki  Pheri\  which  means  (like)  the  wan derings  of  Dattareya.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  death, but  the  tradition  is  that  he  disappeared  from  this world  at  a  place  near  the  confluence  of  the  rivers Panchganga  and  Krishna ;  and  to  perpetuate  his memory  a  temple  has  been  built  at  the  exact  spot of  his  disappearance.  Fairs  are  held  at  this  place  for weeks  at  a  time.
While  in  some  places  Dattareya  is  worshipped on  the  evening  of  his  birthday,  in  other  places  the worship  is  done  on  other  days.  This  worship  is  done by  some  on  the  seventh  day  before  the  full-moon day,  or  9th,  5th,  3rd  or  one  day  before  his  birthday. Puja  is  done  about  six  o’clock  in  the  evening.  He is  worshipped  as  having  within  himself  the  essence of  the  three  great  Gods.  The  people  hold  meetings in  which  religious  songs  are  sung  and  discourses given.  These  are  called  ‘Kirtans’  and  ‘Bhajans’.  It does  not  matter  so  much  if  on  the  days  before  the actual  birthday  Kirtans,  etc.,  are  not  held,  but  it  is  necessary  that  at  exactly  12  o’clock  of  his  birthday  (the time  at  which  D'atta  was  born),  there  should  be  held Kirtans  and  religious  sing-songs,  and  worship  con ducted.  The  rituals  begin  at  9  o’clock  in  the  morning of  that  day,  and  are  so  timed  that  the  whole  thing  is finished  at  12  o’clock  as  in  the  case  of  the  birth  of Rama,  the  husband  of  Sita.  As  usual  on  such festivals,  a  fast  is  strictly  observed