HOLI
The  Holi  (Molika  or  Hut  asani)  , a very  popular festival,  falls  on  the  full-moon  of  Philgun. Its  origin  is  explained  by  different  men  in different  ways.  Some  say  that  it  is  a  relic  of an  old  Aryan  festival  and  is  connected  with  sun- worship  or  fire-worship.  Others  think  that  it  had  its origin  in  the  setting  aside  by  the  vulgar  crowd  of  a few  days  for  licentious  indulgence.
The  Hindu  religious  books  also  mention  a tradition  of  observing  the  Holi  festival  on  the  full- moon  day  of  this  month.  There  is  a  legend  connected with  the  festival,  that  the  God  of  Love  was  once  sent by  the  gods  to  Shiva  to  lodge  a  complaint  against  a demon  who  was  troubling  them.  This  poor  god  went to  Shiva  at  a  time  when  he  was  busy  with  his  devotions.  His  wrath  at  the  interruption  was  so  great that  the  gods’  representative  was  burnt  to  ashes  on the  spot.  But  why  this  incident  is  connected  with  the perpetuation  of  this  festival,  perhaps  Shiva  alone knows.
The  following  story  is  also  associated  with  the Holi  festival.  By  virtue  of  a  boon  obtained  through the  favour  of  Shiva,  a  demoness  by  name  Holika, became  very  powerful  in  a  certain  town.  Besides eating  up  the  children  of  the  locality  she  began  to trouble  the  people  without  any  apparent  cause.  They approached  Vasishta,  a  Brahman  Rishi  (sage),  who suggested  a  way  of  getting  rid  of  her.  On  the  15th day  of  the  moon  of  Phalgun,  i.e.,  on  full-moon  day, an  image  of  this  demoness  was  to  be  thrown  into  the fire,  and  the  burning  fuel  caught  in  the  hands,  and great  noise  made.  At  the  same  time,  they  were  to say  all  sorts  of  bad  things  against  her  character  and organize  a  sham  chase  after  her,  the  idea  being  to annoy  her  so  much  that  she  might  commit  suicide. As  the  suggested  remedy  proved  effective,  the  people kept  up  the  practice  till  it  reached  the  dimensions  it has  now  assumed.  Now  the  belief  is  that  the  troubles and  anxieties  of  the  people  are  thrown  into  the  fire in  the  form  of  a  demoness,  which  makes  the  people happy.
But  ‘the  man  in  the  street  hardly  cares  to  know anything  about  its  origin.  Many  of  the  educated Hindus  with  whom  the  author  has  talked,  say  that the  origin  was  the  sun-worship,  and  that  ignorant people  have  adapted  it  to  their  own  whims  and fancies.
In  North  India  where  it  is  very  cold  in  the winter,  people  welcome  the  Hoii  days  as  the  forerunners  of  a  warmer  season  though  the  author  knows from  personal  experience  in  the  North  and  North- West  India  that  some  years  it  is  very  very  cold during  the  Holi  days— piercing  and  biting  winds  blow and  the  weather  is  generally  very  dull  indeed.
In  the  Central  Provinces  where  the  summer comes  much  earlier,  people  think  that  the  real  summer — intense  heat — begins  from  the  Holi  days  and they,  no  wonder,  do  not  welcome  the  Holi  in  the  same sense  as  people  do  in  North  India.  It  has  been noticed  that  it  rains  fairly  regularly  on  Holi  days  in Central  Provinces  also  which  makes  the  weather fine  and  pleasant.
It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  some  people  take the  Purniroa  (the  full-moon  day)  as  the  first  day  of Holi  and  some  as  the  last  day  of  the  five  days  of the  festival.
Fifteen  days  previous  to  Holi  people  begin  to make  preparations  for  the  burning  of  a  bonfire. Boys  and  young  men  go  about  from  door  to  door begging  money  for  purchasing  fuel  but  particularly to  enjoy  a  feast  after  the  full-moon.  In  some  places in  North  India,  school  children  go  about  begging in  groups  under  the  personal  supervision  of  their teachers,  dancing  with  small  sticks  in  their  hands ; but  round  about  Central  India  this  peculiar  dance  is confined  chiefly  to  the  low  castes,  especially  Mahars. After  all  the  begging  is  done,  the  regular  stealing  of things  which  can  be  burnt  is  begun,  and  the  boys steal  anything  they  can  lay  their  hands  upon,  including  crude  furniture  of  any  kind,  fuel,  cow dung. The  tearing  of  door-posts  and  doors  off  their  hinges is  not  an  uncommon  practice.  Once  in  a  certain place,  all  the  municipal  notice  boards  disappeared  in one  night  !  Shopkeepers  are  too  clever  to  leave their  sign  boards  overnight  unguarded.  The  stolen wooden  cots  make  excellent  fuel  that  day.  Bullock carts  go  the  same  way.  School  benches,  tables  and other  furniture  have  also  been  seen  to  be  burning  on the  same  pile.
If  a  tree  is  lying down  on  the  roadside,  a group  of  boys  will  go  and  set  fire  to  it.  Wooden things  are  very  unsafe  these  days.  A  year  ago,  the author  saw  an  urchin  go  up  to  a  bullock  cart  carrying firewood  and  without  paying  any  regard  to  the feelings  of  the  owner-driver  began  taking  out  a  couple of  logs.  When  in  great  anger  the  driver  wanted  to know  what  he  was  doing,  the  boy  without  caring  to lift  up  his  eyes,  simply  and  very  calmly  replied, “Don’t  you  know  it  is  Holi  ?  The  wonder  of  wonder is  that  he  did  not  say  a  word  and  the  boy  coolly  went away  with  two  decent-looking  logs.
The  whole  atmosphere  that  day  is  charged  with a  peculiar  madness.  Boys  often  go  beyond  the  limits of  decency.
Once,  an  accomplice  in  a  Holi  day  adventure told  the  author  that  he,  along  with  a  few  other  boys of  the  locality,  entered  the  house  of  a  newly  married A couple  rather  late  at  night  and  very  cautiously  lifted their  beds,  and  brought  them  fast  asleep  to  the  Holi fire  in  the  street  where  previously  strict  silence  was enjoined  and  was  observed.  It  was  the  old  man’s third  marriage.  No  sooner  had  they  dropped  the  cots to  the  ground  abruptly  than  the  couple,  in  the  midst  of great  noise  and  mischievous  allusions,  opened  their eyes  and  for  a  minute  they  could  hardly  tell  whether everything  that  was  happening  there  was  real  or  a dream.  The  couple  looked  at  each  other  and  then  at the  crowd  and  then  to  the  sky  and  the  stars  and  then to  the  fire  which  reminded  them  of  the  Holi  and the  “possibilities  connected  with  it.  The  old  man  was in  a  furious  rage.  He  began  to  curse  them  most profusely,  all  the  more  so  when  their  bed-clothing was  thrown  away  at  a  safe  distance  from  the fire,  and  the  cots  themselves  into  the  fire.  The  bride ran  away  to  her  home  and  the  old  man  followed  suit on  realising  his  utter  helplessness.
Holi  is  an  occasion  on  which  the  suppressed scandal  of  the  previous  year  is  publicly  announced without  any  restrictions,  and  always  to  the  face  and in  the  presence  of  the  person  or  persons  connected with  it.  It  is  a  pathetic  sight  if  a  victim,  whether a  man  or  a  woman,  passes  by  the  crowd  of  the Holikars.  The  leading  man  of  the  group  asks  in a  loud  voice  a  meaningful  question  of  the  crowd in  regard  to  the  victim  who  is  passing  by,  and  they in  reply  shout  out  at  the  top  of  their  voices  giving in  the  minutest  details  the  whole  scandal.  In return  the  victim  gets  angry  but  has  to  run  away as  there  is  no  other  recourse.  Young  women, as  a  rule,  are  not  allowed  to  go  out  during  those days  and  they  are  strictly  prohibited  by  their parents,  husbands  or  brothers  to  even  peep  out  of their  house  doors,  because  a  mere  sight  of  a  girl might  bring  forth  abusive  language  from  Holi-walas. An  old  man  generally  makes  a  very  good  victim, because  he  is  reminded  of  the  scandal  of  his  young days  without  regard  being  had  to  the  fact  that  he has  now  perhaps  renounced  the  world  and  is  busy in  his  religious  pursuits.  The  wrath  of  the  old man  can  better  be  imagined  than  described.  He showers  a  volley  of  abuses  on  the  young  men  but that  of  course  acts  like  drops  of  water  on  an  oily surface.  If  a  person  cannot  take  revenge  on  any other  day  of  the  year,  this  is  the  day.
It  has  been  described  above  how  the  necessary fuel  is  collected  for  the  Holi  bonfire.  Now  on  the Holi  day  all  the  stolen  fuel  is  piled  in  a  place  and in  the  centre  of  it  a  plant  of  Shevar  (Seskami  alzytia) is  fixed — failing  to  get  this  plant  they  use  castor  or arandi  plant  as  substitute.  Sometimes  a  red  or green  flag  is  substituted.  The  origin  of  the  fixing of  the  plant  is  not  known  but  is  followed  as  an old  custom.  After  the  time  of  the  burning  of  the Holi  is  announced,  the  young  people  busy  themselves  with  Pakwans  and  other  eatable  preparations until  the  evening  draws  nigh  when  a  drum  is beaten  with  a  peculiar  and  special  beat  to  call the  people  from  their  houses  to  a  place  where  the fire  is  going  to  be lit.  At  the  appointed  time  people gather  round  the  pile  and  throw  on  it  some  of  their own  fuel  which  they  bring  from  home  and  set  fire to.  The  ordinary  process  of  worship  of  the  pile is  gone  through  and  then  it  is  immediately  followed by  Bom  Thokna.  (Bom  Thokna  means  the  striking of  the  back  side  of  the  hand  against  the  mouth  and producing  a  loud  sound.)
Those  who  do  not  want  to  attend  the  common Holi  because  they  do  not  like  to  indulge  in  unpleasant  fun,  burn  a  Holi  at  home  and  worship  it  there. But  they  have  to  fast  that  day,  though  others  who take  part  in  public  bonfires  are  generally  exempt from  this. Holi  is  not  burnt  in  a  single  place  in  a  village or  a  town.  Different  streets  or  sections  of  the  town have  their  own  Holis  burnt  and  the  same  process gone  through.  It  is  after  the  process  of  Bom  Mama that the  unpleasant  fun  described  above  begins. This  goes  on  till  the  young  men  have  done  all  the jumping  over  the  fire  though  it  does  not  always  end there  as  the  young  men  are  not  satisfied  yet.  After the  fire  is  out,  the  older  people  go  home  to  break their  fast.  It  is  not  necessary  that  all  the  bonfires should  go  on  the  whole  night.  Though  some  are kept  up  the  whole  night  or  for  a  few  hours,  there are  others — not  many — which  are  kept  burning  for the  full  fifteen  days.  After  the  fires  are  out,  and only  ashes  are  left  over,  the  young  girls  go  immediately  and  fetch  water  and  pour  over  the  ashes. They  take  the  ashes  home  and  spread  it  in  a  circle round  about  which  some  plastering  is  done  with cowdung;  then  an  image  of  Parvati  with  five  horns is  made  and  worshipped  according  to  the  prescribed method.  This  is  done  in  order  to  gain  a  good husband.  This  is  done  regularly  for  some  15  days.
This  custom  of  bonfires  is  like  the  one  that was  observed  in  England  of  bygone  days  on  Midsummer  Day.  To  leap  over  the  flames  was  considered  beneficial  in  curing  diseases.  And  on  this very  day  girls  would  use  different  devices  to discover  their  future  husbands.
Dhurvad  follows  after  the  first  day  and  lasts till  the  4th  day.  During  this  period  people  come out  of  their  houses,  form parties  and  throw at  each  other  any  dirty  thing  imaginable — refuse, ashes,  pealings  of  fruits,  water  and  mud,  etc. After  finishing  with  themselves  they  make  common cause  and  wait  for  the  passers-by  on  whom  they throw  rubbish.  Some  of  them  soak  a  long  piece of  cloth  in  gutter  water  and  lash  it  on passers- by.  During  these  three  days  it  is  rather  dangerous to  pass  by  or  under  the  windows  of  the  houses  as at  any  time  anybody  may  be  completely  covered with  rubbish  or  ashes.  Cautious  people  generally put  on  special  clothes  for  the  occasion.  The  author always  did  so  in  his  boyhood  days.  In  big  cities the  Holi  Festival  does  not  generally  pass  off  peacefully.  Almost  every  year  a  number  of  men  are arrested  by  the  police  on  a  charge  of  disorderly conduct,  for  indiscriminately  throwing  mud,  dye,  coloured  water  and  cowdung  at  pedestrians and  at  passengers  in  tram  cars.  Even  brickbats and  other  hard  missiles  are  also  used  occasionally.
The  fifth  day  is  called  the  Rang-Panchmi — ‘the colour-fifth.  On this  day,  coloured  water  is  thrown  at each  other.  It  is  generally  done  by  means  of  tin  or bamboo  syringes.  Sham  fights  between  parties  are arranged  and  the  party  unable  to  withstand  the tremendous  flow  of  coloured  water  is  taken  to  be  defeated.  On this  day  the  faces  of  the  men  are  always well-coloured.  They  soak  their  hands  in  some  sort  of wet  colour  and  rub  them  on  each  other's  faces  . The  passer-by  is  not  frequently  let  alone.  Boys  go about  in  the  streets  with  a  thick  plaster  of  some colour  on  the  palms  of  their  hands.  As  soon  as  they see  a  victim — one  whose  face  is  not  covered  with colour — they  spit  in  their  hands  to  wet  the  colour and  rub  it  on  the  face  of  the  victim  forcibly.  One can’t  expect  them  to  carry  about  water  to  wet  their hands  on  the  Holi  days,  because  decency  is  the thing  which  for  a  few  days  is  entirely  banished  from their  minds.
People  do  not  mind  drinking  if  they  feel  like doing  so  and  this  leads  them  further.  Hindu  washermen,  cobblers  and  shoemakers  drink  heavily on  this  day.  They  go  about  the  streets  singing filthy  songs  and  beating  tomtoms,  dressed  in  white shirts  sprinkled  over  with  all  shades  of  colour.  In a  certain  town  in  Central  Provinces  the  Mahars — a low  caste — take  out  what  they  call  a  mel.  They pick  out  a  number  of  young  boys — about  15  years of  age — who  are  dressed  in  fancy  girls’  costumes. With  drums,  harmoniums  and  flutes  they  go  to  the houses  of  their  patrons  and  friends  of  higher  castes and  give  exhibitions  of  their  dances.  They  spend quite  an  amount  of  money  on  paints,  trinkets  and dresses  but  they  are  generally  able  to  recover  their expenses  and  enough  to  enjoy  a  feast  almost  every day  of  the  Holi  season  through  the  ‘bakshish  that they  get.  Their  greatest  patron  is  the  Raja  who, as  they  said,  is  bound  to  have  their  dance  performed in  his  palace  every  year  and  pay  a  handsome  reward.
On  Rang-Panchmi  many  follow  the  example of  Krishna  with  the  16,000  Gopies  (herdswomen)  of Gokul  where  he  was  brought  up.  Rang-Panchmi is  played  in  families  too,  between  sisters,  wives  of the  sons  and  other  ladies  of  a  joint  family.  On  this day  the  streets  are  covered  with  all  sorts  of  colours, the  doors  and  walls  are  full  of  them,  and  almost every  Hindu  is  covered  with  it  from  head  to  foot.
People  generally  wear  old  white  garments  to  give them  a  striking  effect.
A  traveller  in  Nepal  found  that  during  the Rang-Panchmi  day  all  the  streets  were  coloured green  and  red  and  that  even  the  frontier  was  dyed in  a  similar  manner.  There  even  the  ears  of both  men  and  women  are  syringed  with  coloured water.
Some  Brahmins  consider  the  new-born  child impure  until  it  has  been  taken  round  the  Holi-fire thrice  in  the  arms  of  its  mother  and  the  fire  worshipped  with  sprinkling  water  and  by  throwing grains  and  cocoanuts  in  the  fire.  Cocoanuts  rescued from  the  fire  are considered  holy  and  spiritually good  for  the  eater.  Some  sects  of  Brahmins  sprinkle red  Holi  powder  on  the  white  garment  of  the  child. It  is  considered  purifying.
A  child  carried  round  the  bonfire  seven  times is  believed  to  be  safe  against  the  attacks  of  witches.
The  iron  or  wooden  pegs  with  which  the  house hold  cattle  are  tied  if  touched  with  fresh  cowdung taken  out  of  the  bonfire  is  considered  a  good  preventative  against  the  attacks  of  witches  and  also diseases  of  diverse  kinds.
Salt  bought  on  Holi  day  if  heated  on  the  bonfire and  given  to  the  animals  saves  them  during  the  year from  diseases  peculiar  to  them.
If  a  Brahmin  or  any  other  high  caste  man  on this  day  touches  a  low  caste  man  or  woman,  provided he  takes  bath  immediately  after  it,  is  considered immune  against  all  kinds  of  illnesses.