JANAM  ASHTAMI
(Krishnashtami  or  Gokul  Ashtami)
There  is  a  tradition    that whenever  the  wicked  annoy  and  persecute the  righteous  for  their  righteousness,  God undertakes  an  incarnation,  not  only  to  fight for  them,  but  also  to  save  the  world  from  destruction imminent  on  account  of  their  evil  deeds.  Krishna, the  eighth  avatar  or  incarnation,  came  to  the  world for  this  purpose,  and  also  in  response  to  the  prayers of  Vasudeo  who  wanted  to  see  him.
Devaki,  a  cousin  of  Kauns  or  Kamsa,  King  of Muttra,  was  married  to  Vasudeo  of  the  Chandra Bansi  family,  or  Lunar  race.  On  the  marriage  day, the  king  drove  the  couple  in  his  own  chariot,  and took  them  in  a  procession  through  the  streets.  As the  royal  procession  was  passing,  a  voice  from heaven  addressed  Kauns  and  said  that  the  eighth child  of  Devaki  would  kill  him.  Now  Kauns  was  a most  unpopular  and  cruel  king ;  and  the  people, having  got  tired  of  his  tyranny, prayed  to  be  saved from  his  unjust  rule.  So  when  Kauns  heard  these words  he  became  angry,  and  determined  to  kill  Devaki immediately,  but  when  Vasudeo  promised  to  hand over  all  his  children  to  him,  he  desisted.  The  first six  children  were  delivered  into  his  hand  to  be murdered,  but  the  seventh,  and  the  eighth  who  was Krishna,"'  escaped.
At  the  time  of  Kirshna’s  birth,  Vasudeo  seized him  in  his  arms,  and  under  the  hooded  protection  of Sesha  Nag,  the  snake,  he  passed  out  of  the  palace gate  without  being  observed  by  the  guard,  who  was fast  asleep.  This  happened  at  dead  of  night,  when the  rain  was  pouring  heavily  and  the  river  Jumna was  full  and  flowing  furiously.  As  he  entered  the river  to  cross  (some  say  it  became  knee-deep)  the hanging  feet  of  Krishna  touched  the  water,  whereupon  it  parted  into  two,  and  thus  they  walked  across on  the  dry  bed  with  the  walls  of  water  on  both  sides.
Now  across  the  river  in  the  village  of  Gokul, a  female  child  was  also  born  at  the  same  time  as Krishna,  to  Jasoda,  the  wife  of  Nanda,  a  cowherd. Before  the  woman  returned  to  her  senses,  the children  were  exchanged  and  the  girl  brought  to  the palace,  where  she  cried.  The  guards  hearing  it, hastened  to  inform  the  king,  who  came  immediately
 Krishna  can  be  recognized  in  current  pictures  by  his  blue complexion.  He  wears  a  coronet  on  his  head,  has  four  hands, and  holds  in  each  hand  respectively  a  conch  shell,  a  staff,  a  sharp white  discus  whirling  round  one  of  his  fingers,  and  a  flute.  He stands  on  a  lotus-flower,  and  the  soles  of  his  feet  are  marked with  the  same  flower.
to  kill  her  but  before  he  could  do  so,  the  child slipped  from  his  hands  and  went  up  like  lightning, laughing  and  saying  “O  Fool  the  boy,  thine  enemy, is  born  elsewhere;  take  care!’;  and  disappeared- Thereupon  the  king,  full  of  wrath,  ordered  that every  strong  and  newly-born  male  child  in  the kingdom  should  be  put  to  death,  and  sent  his  men in  all  directions  for  this  purpose.
When  he  came  to  know  of  a  child  in  Gokul  who was  wonderfully  strong  and  active,  he  sent  his  man for  him  in  disguise.  That  man  went  to  the  door  of Nanda’s  house  in  the  guise  of  a  Brahmin  to  beg.  As usual,  the  beggar  Brahmin  uttered  the  words  of blessing  saying  ‘May  God  make  you  a  Raja/  and  so on,  and  thereupon  the  wooden  cradle  on  which Krishna  was  lying  went  flying  towards  him  and  hit him.  This  man, whose  name  was  Mamam  Bhatji, informed  Kauns  of  what  had  happened.
On  hearing  of  this,  the  king  became  very  sad and  said  that  Krishna,  as  a  mere  child,  was  already playing  havoc,  and  when  he  would  grow  up  to  be  a man  he  would  be  uncontrollable.  However,  years passed  by,  and  one  day,  in  full  Durbar,  Krishna  came in,  looking  a  mere  child  to  the  eyes  of  all  except Kauns  himself  to  whom  he  looked  like  a  huge  giant. He  went  to  him,  sprang  upon  his  chest  and  killed him  with  his  sword  in  front  of  the  full  assembly. He  then  took  the  reins  of  government  in  his  own hands,  and  from  there  proceeded  to  Dwarka  which  he built  for  the  people  of  Mathura.
In  order  to  worship  Krishna  whose  other  names are  Kanoba,  Girdhari,  Kunjbehari,  Bensriwala, Kanhiyya,  people  buy  his  idol  ready-made  from  the bazaar  or  make  it  at  home.  Armed  with  his  ‘weapons’ he  is  placed  in  the  middle  of  a  small  wooden  table which  is  kept  on  a  place  nicely  plastered-over  with cowdung.  Besides  his  flute  he  holds  a  laddu  (sweet meat  ball)  also  in  one  of  his  hands.  Being  a  child, he  is  naturally  pleased  to  have  this  ‘sweet.  The table  is  surrounded  by  flower-pots,  and  the  idol  is sprinkled  over  with  red  powder  and  scent.  A  tiny oil  lamp  is  also  placed  in the  image.  Men  and women  worship  together  with  the  help  of  the  necessary  materials  of  worship,  and  are  guided  by  a Brahmin  priest  ,  who  is  paid  four  to  eight  annas  as his  fee,  and  invited  to  the  feast  next  morning,  to which  friends  and  relatives  are  also  invited.  This worship  is  conducted  at  twelve  o’clock  at  night. Previous  to  it  for  three  or  four  hours  the  account  of Krishna’s  birth  is  recited  to  the  congregation  collected  for  the  purpose,  and  is  timed  to  finish  just  at midnight,  when  the  book  is  closed  rather  abruptly  in order  that  the  audience  might  proceed  to  worship. It  may  be  mentioned  that  the  following  things  are distributed  among  the  congregation,  as  ‘parshad’: — parched  maize  or  dhan,  pounded  rice,  cucumber,  curd, mango  pickle,  juice  of  sugarcane  and  chillies.  The reason  for  this  is  that  Krishna  in  his  boyhood,  when out  grazing  the  cattle,  used  to  collect  the  other cowherd-boys  and  make  them  put  their  food  in  the midst  to  be  shared  by  all,  thus  enabling  everybody to  enjoy  different  things.  This  way  of  collecting food  together  is  called  Gopal  Kala.  This  account  of Krishna’s  life  is  repeated  year  after  year.
The  same  night  and  the  next  morning  also, the  idol  is  placed  in  a  beautiful  cradle  which  is swung  while  the  girls  sing  a  lullaby  to  put  the  child Krishna  to  sleep.  Right  above  the  cradle,  within the  reach  of  child  Krishna,  hangs  what  is  called  a Pholora — a  framework  of  four  wooden  sticks  tied to  each  other  in  crosswise  fashion.  On  the  joint of  these  sticks  hang  by  threads  all  the  delicious things  which  the  worshipper  can  procure  or  prepare for  pleasing  him,  so  that  Krishna  may  have  just  to stretch  out  his  hand  in  order  to  eat  whatever  his taste  demands.  Iron  Pholoras  can  be  had  ready made  from  bazaars.
On  the  evening  of  Janam  Ashtami  day  the idols  of  Krishna  are  taken  in  procession,  with  singing  and  music,  to  a  stream  or  a  tank  where  they are  immersed  in  water.  In  a  small  town,  the  idols owned  by  rich  men,  generally  made  of  silver,  are taken  to  the  tank  on  picturesque  chariots  decorated with  plantain-leaves  and  flower-pots,  and  drawn by  a  team  of  painted  bullocks.  A  procession  of  a large  number  of  such  picturesque  chariots  carrying Shining  silver  images  preceded  by  Indian  bands and  halting  by  the  side  of  a  big  tank  surrounded by  huge  banyan  trees,  produces  an  impression  which is  not  soon  forgotten.  It  looks  like  a    dream  of  the East.  Before  immersion  the  idols  are  taken  to  a boat  specially  made  for  the  purpose  which  takes them  round  for  a  joy-ride  before  consigning  them to  oblivion  for  at  least  a  year.  This  boat  is  generally  made  of  big  rafters  tied  together.  On  it  a  hut of  banana  leaves  and  other  green  foliage  is  built  and brilliantly  lighted.  This  looks  very  beautiful  in the  darkness.  The  silver  idols  are  then  restored  to their  different  chariots  which  are  stationed  in  front of  the  tank  temple ;  and  there  people  pass  from chariot  to  chariot,  bowing.
In  the  Central  Provinces,  the  Mahars  sow wheat  in  baskets  some  eight  days  before  the  birth day. As  they  take  the  clay  images  to  be  thrown in  the  stream,  they  take  along  these  baskets.  When the  mud  is  washed  off  the  roots  of  the  pale-coloured sprouts,  they  bring  them  back,  some  to  be  kept  in the  place  of  the  image,  and  the  rest  to  be  exchanged with  friends  as  symbols  of  greetings.
The  festival  of  Krishna  is  the  only  one  of  two or  three  festivals  which  come  in  the  dark  half  of  a month,  the  others  being  Shivratri  and  Devali. Krishna  himself  was  dark-blue  in  complexion.  And darkness  came  on  this  world  by  his  death  ;  for  Kali Yuga  began  with  his  death.
Rukinini  was  his  wife  and  Radha  his  Love. More  praises  are  sung  of  Radha  than  his  wife.  In the  North  it  is  Radha  who  is  mentioned  with  his name.  In  the  Central  Provinces,  especially  among the  Mahars,  young  boys  form  themselves  into  a party,  and  go  dancing  with  music,  through  the streets.  Both  old  and  young,  men  and  women, enjoy  it  tremendously  and  are  greatly  excited.  They enjoy  particularly  the  rhythmic  dance,  in  which the  dancers  use  short  multi-coloured  sticks,  striking them  together  while  dancing  in  a  ring  and  in  different  formations. The  striking  of  sticks  keeps  time with  the  stamping  of  feet  which  are  covered  with anklets  of  tiny  brass  bells.  At  frequent  intervals a  man  somewhere  on  the  outskirts  of  the  crowd fires  a  rocket,  which  immediately  brings  the  dancing party  to  its  knees.  Then  the  leader  of  the  group shouts  ‘Krishna  Maharaj  ki  jai 'and  the  party  is  up  on its  feet  again  and  goes  on  dancing  as  before.  This party  exhibits  its  art  from  house  to  house  of  those friends,  acquaintances  and  others  who  are  likely to  give  some  bakhshish.
Krishna,  as  the  most  popular  incarnation  of Vishnu,  is  worshipped  all  over  India  though  under different  names.  He  was  born  in  the  Rohini  asterism and  killed  his  maternal  uncle.  So  if  a  boy  is  born with the  same  asterism,  his  maternal  uncle  (if  he  has any)  does  not  feel  very  happy  at  his  birth.  In former  days  such  children  were  put  to  death  ;  but these  days  a  maternal  uncle  is  just  superstitiously careful  and  is  teased  by  his  friends.
In  some  parts  of  Central  India,  especially  in the  C.  P.  and  Berar,  the  ceremony  of  the  birth of  Krishna  is  observed  in  another  way  also.  On this  day  a  pitcher  full  of  curd  is  hung  on  a  tree some  eight  feet  above  the  ground,  under  which  both the  old  and  the  young  dance  vigorously  for  two hours  before  the  birth  of  Krishna,  which  takes  place exactly  at  midnight.  At  this  time  the  dancers break  the  pitcher  as  they  dance  beneath  it,  and  the curd  that  falls  on  them  is  caught  in  their  hands and  eaten  as  prasad.  The  whole  thing  is  taken more  as  a  joke  than  as  a  serious  religious  ceremony. It  may  be  noted  that  curd,  butter  and  milk  were the  things  which  were  greatly  relished  by  Krishna in  his  boyhood  in  Gokul  where  he  was  brought  up among  herdsmen.
Mention  may  be  made  here  of  the  boyish pranks  of  Krishna.  They  are  recounted  among  the old  and  the  young,  with  enjoyment.  He  has  endeared  himself  to  millions  of  simple  folk  in  this manner.  He  is  remembered  as  the  leader  of  the boys  who  followed  him  with  unswerving  zeal  and faithfulness.  He  was  particularly  fond  of  curd and  butter  and  in  the  effort  to  secure  these  would go  to  any  lengths.  He  would  set  out  on  such  petty expeditions  well  armed  with  the  necessary  weapons of  stealing,  which  were  a  thick  stick,  sand,  ground chillies  and  thorns.  These  weapons  he  used  only for  defending  himself  in  awkward  situations.  The sand  he  would  throw  into  the  eyes  of  any  who  came upon  him  in  the  act  of  stealing.  If  he  wanted  just a  second  to  clear  off  he  would  throw  sand,  but  for a  long  period  he  would  throw  chillies  which  were more  effective.  The  thorns  he  would  spread  on  the way  if  anyone  chased  him  in  order  to  gain  a  start every  time  the  chaser  bent  down  to  pick  out  one from  the  sole  of  his  or  her  feet.  He  used  to  go  on such  expeditions  either  along  with  a  group  of  clever boys  or  alone.