RAMNAUMI
DASRATH,  king  of  Ayodhya,  had  three  wives, Kausaliya,  Kaikaie  and  Sumitra.  Ram, Kausaliya’s  son,  was  the  eldest;  Laxman, Sumitra’s  son,  the  second  ;  Bharat,  Kaikaie’s son,  the  third  and  Shatruguna,  Sumitra’s  second  son, was  the  youngest.
Once  king  Dasrath  went  out  to  battle  against a  neighbouring  king  and  took  Kaikaie  along  in  his chariot,  she  being  the  youngest  of  the  wives.  In  the heat  of  the  battle  when  the  king  himself  was  shooting arrow  after  arrow  and  the  chariot  was  reeling  to  and fro,  Kaikaie  noticed  that  one  of  the  wheels  was  just going  to  drop  off,  the  spike  holding  the  wheel  having slipped  out.  She  put  her  own  hand  into  the  place and  kept  the  wheel  from  falling  off.  As  the  king happened  to  look  back  after  the  victory  he  realized to  his  amazement  what  she  had  been  doing.  He  was so  greatly  struck  by  her  fidelity  that  he  promised her  any  two  boons  which  she  might  ask,  and  which when  she  did  eventually  ask  placed  him  in  an awkward  situation.  The  story  of  the  boons  is  given below : —
One  night  Dasrath  dreamed  that  he  would commit  three  great  sins  in  one  day.  He  stated  it  to his  guru  Vashishta  who  did  not  show  much  surprise at  it  as  he  knew  that  Ram,  one  of  the  incarnations of  Vishnu,  was  to  be  born  in  the  family,  who  would be  exiled  for  fourteen  years,  and  consoled  the  king  by saying  that  he  should  not  worry  about  it.
One  day  Dasrath  went  out  for  shikar — hunting — “and  sat  by  a  tank  to  await  some  animal  who  might come  down  either  to  drink  water.  At  a  distance  he saw  a  boy  (whose  name  was  Shrawan)  carrying  a Baling! — a  big  balance  like  contrivance  for  carrying things.  The  boy  carried  his  old  and  blind  parents  in each  basket  and  was  bound  for  Kashi  (Benares)  on pilgrimage.  The  older  people  always  have  a  great desire  to  visit  it  before  death.  As  they  were  thirsty and  wanted  water,  he  hung  the  bahngi  on  to  a  tree in  order  that  they  might  be  safe  from  wild  animals and  went  to  the  tank  to  fill  the  lota  (vessel  with narrow  neck)  with  water.  Now  Dasrath  had  not seen  the  boy  going  down,  so  when  he  heard  the gurgling  sound  of  the  water  going  into  the  narrow mouth  of  the  vessel,  he  took  aim  and  let  fly  an  arrow in  the  direction  of  the  sound,  (being  unable  to  see  on account  of  thick  growth  all  round)  thinking  that  some animal  had  come  down  to  drink  water.  He  heard the  scream  of  the  boy  and  ran  down  to  see  what  he had  done.  The  boy  had  been  struck  right  in  the heart  and  was  crying  ‘Hai  Ram,  Hai  Ram’;  and  on enquiry  explained  his  presence  there.  He  asked Dasrath  to  give  his  thirsty  parents  some  water  to drink  and  immediately  after  breathed  his  last. Dasrath  took  them  water  with  no  intention  to  speak lest  they  should  recognize  his  voice  and  question their  son.  But  the  parents  insisted  on  asking him  his  reasons  for  being  so  late  when  he  knew  that they  were  so  thirsty.  The  king  had  to  explain  the whole  thing  . On  account  of  intense  grief,  the  old people  died  immediately,  crying  for  Shravan  and cursing  the  king  that  he  would  also  die  crying  for his  children.  Thus  he  was  instrumental  in  killing three  persons  during  one  day.  He  recited  the  story to  Vaishishta  but  was  quite  happy  in  one  way  and that  was  because  thereby  as  a  result  of  the  curse he  was  sure  to  get  children,  as  until  then  he  had  no children  and  was  longing  for  some,  though  he  knew that  by  the  curse  of  Shravan’s  parents  they  were  to die  as  also  by  curse  they  were  to  be  born.  In  due time  Kausaliya  conceived  and  before  giving  birth  she once  got  frightened  and  exclaimed  “Where  is  my arrow?  I  want  to  kill  Rawan”.  The  people  around got  frightened  and  questioned  Vaishishta  who said  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  surprised  at as  this  was  to  happen  as  ordained.  It  may  be mentioned  here  that  Ravan,  king  of  Lanka  (Ceylon), who  knew  that  he  would  be  killed  by  the  hands of  Ram,  the  son  of  Kausalya,  had  put  Kausalya when  yet  a  girl  in  a  box  and  thrown  away  in  the sea  in  order  to  destroy  her  but  unfortunately  for Ravan  the  box  had  been  washed  ashore  and  rescued.
Ram  was  born  in  due  time  and  when  he  was grown  up,  Dasrath  decided  to  abdicate  in  favour  of his  eldest  son — Ram.  Now  Kaikaie  had  a  servant woman  named  Manthara.  She  instigated  Kaikaie against  Ram  and  reminded  her  of  Dasrath’s  promise of  granting  her  any  two  boons  she  wanted.  She  said that  it  was  the  time  and  advised  her  to  ask  for 14  years  of  exile  for  Ram  and  the  throne  for  Bharat, her  own  son.  Kaikaie  went  in  mourning  when  she saw  that  preparations  were  being  made  for  giving  the throne  to  Ram  and  thus  with  her  womanish  cun ning  and  with  the  king’s  promise  she  managed  to  get what  she  wanted  though  the  king  was  very  sad  that such  things  should  have  been  asked  by  Kaikaie  whom he  considered  a  good  woman.  However,  when  Ram came  to  know  of  it,  he  readily  consented  and  said that  Kaikaie  too  being  his  mother,  he  would  go  to the  jungles  for  fourteen  years.  Bharat  was  at  this time  at  his  uncle’s.  When  he  returned  he  found what  his  mother  had  done.  He  became  very  angry and  said  where  there  was  no  Ram — an  incarnation of  God  Vishnu  himself— there  was  no  place  for him  to  live.  Bharat  loved  Ram  dearly  and  could not  tolerate  this  separation.  He  left  everything and  put  Ram’s  slippers  on  the  throne  and  disappeared  in  the  jungles  to  pass  his  days  in  voluntary  exile. Kaikaie  now  regretted  very  much  and  was  very  sad over  the  whole  affair.  However,  Ram  left  for  the jungle  accompanied  by  his  wife  Sita  and  brother Laxman.  The  Government  was  carried  on  by ministers.
After  fourteen  years,  Ram  reached  Lanka (Ceylon)  where  he  killed  the  giant  king  Ravan  who had  stolen  away  his  wife  Sita  while  in  the  jungles. He  put  his  (Ravan’s)  brother  Bhibishan  on  the  throne of  Lanka  and  returned  with  Sita.  Bhibishan  was very  fond  of  Ram  and  considered  himself  his  devotee. On  her  release  Ram  suspected  Sita’s  purity  of character  and  on  the  suggestion  of  Sita  herself  he put  her  in  a  furnace  to  test  whether  she  had  pre served  her  honour  while  in  the  palace  of  Ravan. She  came  out  unscathed  and  lived  happily  with him  until  one  day  in  order  to  find  out  as  to  what people  thought  of  him  on  account  of  taking  Sita again  as  his  .wife  after  her  return  from  Ravan’s palace  at  Lanka,  he  deputed  a  man  to  inform  him of  all  that  he  would  hear  in  this  connection. That  man  not  many  days  after  heard  a  Dhobi (washerman-low  caste)  refusing,  within  the  hearing of  the  neighbours,  to  take  back  his  wife  into  his house  after  her  living  away  from  him  for  a  month or  so  in  the  house  of  her  own  parents  and  declaring questioningly  and  tauntingly  that  he  was  not  Ram that  he  should  admit  his  wife  into  the  house  after her  long  (?)  absence  from  his  home.  When  Ram heard  of  this  taunt,  he  at  once  turned  Sita  out  into the  jungles  where  she  gave  birth  to  twins  whose names  were  Lahoo  and  Kush.
Now  in  the  olden  days  it  was  a  custom  among the  powerful  kings  to  let  loose  a  fully  caparisoned horse  to  roam  about  at  large  which  no  one  dared capture  unless  with  the  intention  of  declaring  war against  the  king  to  whom  the  horse  belonged.  The roamings  of  the  horse  at  large,  in  a  rough  manner described  the  boundaries  of  the  kingdom.  Ram’s two  sons  once  caught  the  horse  and  did  not  let  him go  with  the  result  that  the  father  had  to  fight  with his  forces  against  his  two  children  who  were  just two,  with  no  force.  Ram  was  defeated  and  after  a time  was  reconciled  to  his  children.
So  Ramnaumi  is  observed  on  the  ninth  day of  the  month  of  Chait  in  honour  of  the  birth  of Ram.  For  eight  days  previous  to  this  Ramayan is  recited  in  a  singsong  manner  by  a  ^Haridasi  (the servant  of  god)  before  a  large  audience  every  day till  on  the  9th  noon. Exactly  at  12  o’clock  he  stops, this  being  the  time  at  which  Ram  is  said  to  have been  born.  This  Haridasi  recites  the  history  of Ram,  the  purpose  of  his  birth,  etc.  He  sings  about ten  verses  and  then  stops  to  explain  to  the  audience  the  meaning  of  the  verses  with  suitable comments  of  his  own  and  so  on.  This  man  being professional,  acquires  a  certain  degree  of  skill which  is  necessary  to  produce  the  desired  effect. Such  kirtans  are  generally  held  in  the  compound of  a  temple.  At  12  o’clock  noon  (12  o’clock  at  night in  the  case  of  Krishna  who  was  born  at  midnight) the  Haridasi  announces  the  birth  of  Ram  and  takes a  doll,  wooden  or  made  of  cloth  and  nicely  decorated,  and  puts  it  in  a  cradle  and  rocks  it,  and  no  sooner is  it  done  than  the  people  gathered  together  in  the compound  begin  throwing  Gulal  (Red  powder)  on the  cradle  to  express  their  joy,  while  a  man  takes  a brass  tray  with  a  small  quantity  of  Gulal  in  it  and goes  round  to  mark  the  forehead  of  each  one  of  the audience  ;  the  musical  band  already  stationed  outside the  garlanded  gate  (with  strings  of  fresh  mango leaves  or  plantain  leaves  or  garlands  of  flowers) of  the  temple  immediately  begins  .playing  and  there is  a  great  hustle  and  bustle  in  and  outside  the  temple, crackers  and  rockets  adding  to  the  din.  People distribute  Parsad — sacrament — and  sweets  and fruits  among  the  audience.  Some  distribute  curd mixed  with  sugar  and  slices  of  banana  fruits,
A  fast  must  be  observed  that  day  up  till  the birth  of  Ram  at  12  o’clock  and  generally  people  do not  sleep  that  night.  As  ordinarily  in  the  house where  a  child  is  born,  the  man  and  other  members of  the  family  hardly  get  any  time  to  take  their  meals, so  it  has  become  a  sort  of  tradition  to  observe  a  fast till  12  o’clock ;  it  is  probably  not  enjoined.  People this  day  worship  the  images  of  Ram,  Sita  and  his faithful  brother  Laxman  with  mantras,  others  worship the  Ramayan  book,  and  on  the  same  day  or  the  day Following,  the  silver  images  of  them  are  taken  through bazaars  with  music.  This  is  an  enjoyable  sight.  The cars  in  which  these  images  are  taken  are  beautifully decorated  and  look  dainty.  In  some  places,  in  place of  these  images  three  boys  dressed  to  represent  Ram, Sita  and  Laxman  are  taken  through  the  bazaars  with all  the  Eastern  splendour.  The  image  of  Maruti — the Monkey  god  is  also  carried  on  chariots  in  procession along  with  Ram  and  others.  He  is  considered  to  be god  Ram’s  carriage  just  as  other  gods  have  their  own animals  for  carrying  them  about.  It  was  Mauruti who  helped  Ram  in  burning  Lanka  and  it  was  he who  carried  a  whole  mountain  when  Ram  wanted him  to  bring  a  particular  herb  from  a  certain mountain.
Every  one  observes  this  day  and  celebrates  it with  as  much  rejoicings  and  feastings  as  possible, because  by  observing  the  birthday  of  god  Ram,  the sins  of  the  worshippers  are  washed  as  white  as  snow. In  Northern  India  Ram  stands  more  or  less  for  God. A  common  way  of  salutation  among  Hindus  is  just to  say  “Ram  Ram”  meaning  may  Ram  be  praised. “Rain  Ram.’’  is  used  also  to  ejaculate  an  expression  of  abhorrence  towards  a  thing,  meaning  ‘O Ram  save  us’,  or  ‘take  the  name  of  Ram’  and  don't do  such  a  thing,  etc.
In  the  Central  Provinces,  the  Hindus  go  to  a place  of  pilgrimage  called  Ramtek,  about  twenty miles  from  Nagpur.  ‘Ramtek 'means  the  place  where Ram  on  his  way  back  from  Ceylon  halted  for  a  time accompanied  by  his  wife  Sita.  There  a  temple  is situated  on  the  top  of  a  hill  reached  by  scores  of steps.  Here  a  fair  is  held  every  year  and  people come  from  far  and  near.  The  low  caste  Hindus — Mahars  and  others — are  not  allowed  to  enter  the temple  but  they  can  worship  the  image  from  a  distance  and  the  material  of  worship  such  as  flowers and  cocoanuts  they  deposit  on  the  steps  only.  A little  distance  away  from  the  temple  is  a  small  pit or  a  tank  in  which  Sita  is  said  to  have  taken  bath and  that  place  also  is  worshipped  every  year.  A worshipper  pays  a  price  for  a  tea  spoonful  of  this water.  He  rubs  it  on  his  forehead.
Feasting  of  Brahmins  and  friends  is  done  on  the second  day  of  Ramnaumi  when  in  the  morning  the women  of  the  house  sprinkle  the  ground  with  water in  front  of  their  houses  and  with  powdered  chalk make  excellent  designs  on  them — flowers,  religious symbols,  or  anything  which  they  like  to  have  an outline  of.  The  women  take  great  pride  in  the designs  they  make.
Before  closing  the  chapter  it  may  be  mentioned that  Sita  is  considered  an  ideal  of  Indian  womanhood for  devotion  to  husband  in  trials  and  tribulations  and for  faithfulness  amidst  temptations.
Ram  may  be  recognized  by  his  four  hands, each  holding  a  couch  shell,  a  discus,  a  club  with  a thick  end  and  a  lotus  flower. Like  Krishna  he  also had a blue  complexion.
In  the  Central  Provinces  the  author  once  saw two  processions  going  to  a  tank  on  Ramnaumi  day. One  belonged  to  Hindus  from  the  United  Provinces — and  the  other  to  the  Sweepers.  In  the  one  belonging to  the  high  caste  Hindus  there  were  about  thirty women,  fifteen  of  whom  carried  on  their  heads  small earthenware  containing  very  thick  growth  of yellowish  wheat  sprouts  for  which  seeds  had  been sown  about  ten  days  previous  to  the  festival.  The sprouts  led  one  to  think  of nature  sprouting  in all  its  glory.  It  was  about  the  middle  of  April. These  sprouts  gave  the  idea  of  something  new  and newly  born — this  being  the  anniversary  of  Ram’s birth.  In  the  middle  of  the  sprouts  some  had  a brass  utensil  of  narrow  neck  round  which  was  wound a  garland  of  white  flowers  and  on  top  of  it  a  capsule burning  a  wick  in  clarified  butter,  surrounded  by raw  green  limes.  At  the  head  of  the  procession  was a  group  of  men  with  tom  tom  and  cymbals  singing hymns  in  praise  of  mother  Kali.  In  the  middle  of this  group,  of  men  in  the  front  and  the  group  of women  behind,  there  were  three  men  whose  cheeks were  pierced  through  and  through  by  long  iron tridents.  The  other  ends  of  these  tridents — each about  6  ft.  in  length — were  supported  by  three  men who  kept  them  in  level  with  the  cheeks  in  order  to give  the  pierced  men  as  much  relief  as  possible.The  end  of  the  trident  which  came  out  on  the  other side  of  the  men’s  cheeks  was  covered  by  a  packet of  Pan  (beetle  leaf)  of  triangular  shape.  These  men whose  cheeks  were  pierced  through  were  walking very  quietly,  though  they  were  considered  to  be  possessed  by Kali  Mata.  At  every  stop  a  man  would  cut a  lime  into  two  and  would  press  them  each  by  hand, right  in  front  of  these  men,  quite  near  their  faces. As  was  told  to  the  author,  the  pressing  of  the  cut limes  in  front  of  those  men  was  a  sacrifice  performed  in  lieu  of  goats  and  other  animals.  As  mentioned above  these  men  were  at  that  time  considered  to  be possessed  by the  goddess.  This  procession  reached a  big  tank  where  the  tridents  were  taken  out  of  the men’s  cheeks  and  the  pots  containing  wheat  sprouts were  thrown  in  the  tank  and  of  course  not  the  sprouts themselves.  They  were  washed  and  brought  back and  distributed  among  friends  and  relatives  as  tokens of  greetings.
The  procession  of  sweepers  was  not  different from  that  of  the  Hindus  except  in  a  few  details.  In this, men  carried  the  sprouts  in  the  form  of  torch lights  while  women  had  tiny  red  flags  in  pots placed  in  the  midst  of  sprouts  on  their  heads. The  women  and  men  were  dressed  in  their  best clothes  and  the  procession  had  the  usual  formation — men  and  a  singing  party  with  a  priest  in  front  and women  in  the  rear.  In  between  them  there  was  a young  man  whose  one  cheek  only  was  pierced  by a  long  iron  trident.  In  the  middle  of  the  trident was  a  solitary  cocoanut  pierced  through  previously. This  young  man  was  also  considered  to  be  possessed by mother  Kali.  He  constantly  kept  dancing  a dance  which  looked  more  like  the  shivering  of  the body.  This  procession  also  terminated  at  the  tank. On  enquiry  from  the  sweepers  the  author  found that  they  made  no  distinction  between  Ram  and Kali  Mata.  They  said  that  it  was  all  one,  both being  gods.  Most  of  the  sweepers  did  not  know  at all  as  to  why  they  did  the  whole  thing  except  that it  was  a  Ramnaumi  day.  After  their  return  from the  tank  they  sacrificed  a  goat  in  front  of  the dead  image of  Kali.