SHIVA  RATRI.
Shiva  Ratri  =  Night  devoted  to  Shiva.
SHIVA  is  one  of  the  three  greatest  gods — • Brahma,  the  Creator  ;  Vishnu,  the  Preserver ; and  Shiva,  the  Destroyer— the  last  one  being naturally  the  most  dreaded  of  all.  He  is supposed  to  have  a  thousand  names,  and  each one  of  them  has  got  to  be  recited  while  worshipping  him.  Pashupati  (the  master  of  the  animal, here  meant  of  oxen),  Shiva,  Mahadeo,  Shankar, Har,  Rudra,  Bhava,  Dhurjatti,  Gangadhar  (dhar  = hold  =  one  who  holds),  Nil-Kantha  (one  who  has the  blue  mark  on  his  neck,  which  he  got  by drinking  poison).  Trinetre  (three  eyes),  Vishwesh- war  (Lord  of  the  Universe),  Shambhu,  etc.,  etc., are  some  of  his  names.  He  is  called  Shiva,  the Terrible,  the  Destroyer.  Shiva  is  worshipped every  Monday,  though  originally  this  day  was  fixed for  moon  worship  only.  There  are  two  more  days in  the  week,  which  also  are  undergoing  the  same sort  of  change.
Now,  this  particular  Shiva  Ratri  called  the  Maha Shivaratri— the  big  night  of  the  Shiva,  there  is  one Shivaratri  every  month  which  falls  on  the  13th  of  the dark  half  of  a  month;  but  this  one  comes  in  the  month of  Magh.  Part  of  the  worship  is  conducted  the  same night,  but  the  rest  is  gone  through  in  the  day  time on  the  14th  of  the  dark  half  which  is  the  29th  of Magh  or  one  day  before  Amavasya.  This  is  considered  a  very  holy  day.  There  is  a  story  connected with  this  festival  which  is  worth  recording  here  as it  will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of  th^  greatness of  Shiva  and  also  of  the  way  in  which  his  worship is  conducted.
An  irreligious  and  wicked  hunter,  who  never meditated  on  the  name  of  Shiva  and  whose  one thought  was  that  of  hunting,  started  out  for  the jungle,  as  usual,  with  a  bow  and  arrows.  This  particular  day,  of  which  we  read  the  story,  was  the  Maha Shivaratri  day.  On  his  way  to  the  jungle  he  met many  pilgrims  and  worshippers  who  were  going  to the  temple  of  Shiva  in  the  jungle.  He  did  not  take any  notice  of  them  until  he  himself  passed  by  that temple  and  heard  the  worshippers  say  “Shiva  Shiva  I” and  “Har  Har!’  Now  these  two  expressions  are  ih- voluntary  ejaculations  used  when  some  one  involuntarily  sees  an  evil  thing.  The  hunter  stopped  and wondered  why  the  worshippers  were  using  those expressions  while  actually  worshipping  the  stone  in the  temple.  He  pronounced  the  words,  and  started again,  unconscious  of  the  fact  that  he  was  unconsciously  uttering  the  god’s  name.Now  after  some  time  he  came  across  a  tank which  was  thickly  shaded  by  a  bel-tree  growing  on its  bank.  In  order  to  hide  himself  from  the  animals which  might  come  to  drink  water  from the  tank,  he climbed  up  the  tree. In  order  also  to  have  a  clear view  of  the  whole  tank  in  front  he  broke  off  small twigs  and  branches  and  threw  them  down  so  that there  might  be  no  obstruction  while  taking  aim. On  a  branch  he  hung  up  his  waterbag,  from  which water  fell  drop  by  drop  on  the  ‘pindi’  or  ‘linga’ below.
Now  at  the  same  spot  where  the  wood  apple tree  was  standing  Brahma  himself  had  once  come down  to  worship  Shiva,  and  had  taken  the  sand  out of  the  tank  and  made  a  ‘pindi’  or  ‘linga’  out  of  it. So  the  ‘pind^  was  still  there,  and  a  bel-tree  had  come out  by  the  side  of  it.  The  hunter,  of  course,  did  not know  anything  about  this.  He  had  climbed  up  only in  order  to  have  a  clear  view  of  the  jungle  in  front. The  twigs  and  leaves  which  he  had  broken  off  for this  purpose  fell  on  the  ‘pindi’  without  his  knowledge. Now  the  bell  leaves  are  greatly  loved  by  Shiva — in fact  the  leaves  are.  the  most  essential  material  for his  worship.  Shiva  was  being  worshipped  inadvertently  and  without  the  man’s  knowledge  ;  the  result was  that  his  sins  were  being  forgiven  as  he  proceeded with  the  worship  unconsciously.  At  evening,  when  a doe  came  to  the  water  side,  he  pulled  the  arrow,  but just  as  he  was  going  to  let  it  go  she  happened  to  look at  him  and  said  :  “Why  do  you  kill  me  ?  I  have  not offended  you  in  any  way  but  if  you  are  bent  upon doing  so  please  excuse  me  and  let  me  go  for  a  short while  so  that  I  may  bid  ray  husband  farewell,  for  I am  married  and  am  faithful  to  him.”  He  said, “I  am  afraid  you  won’t  come  back,  and  I  must  have you  as  my  children  are  hungry  ;  but  if  you  promise that  you  will  return  immediately,  I  shall  let  you go.”  She  promised  this  and  went  away.  Now  this doe  had  been  a  favourite  dancing  girl  of  the  gods  in heaven.  Through  constant  patronage  she  got  very proud  with  the  result  that  they  cursed  her  and  sent down  to  the  earth  as  a  doe.  She  had,  however, after  a  time,  gone  and  complained  to  Shiva  who  had promised  that  she  would  again  be  in  heaven  some day  through  an  accident  to  a  man  on  Shivaratri  day.Next  came  a  buck  who  questioned  the  hunter  of his  intentions  towards  him.  He  was  also  given  leave to  go  in  order  to  bid  farewell  to  his  wife.  The buck  was  originally  a  god  who  had  been  turned out  of  heaven  on  account  of  his  bad  character there. Then  came  a  doe  who  promised  to  return  immediately  after  she  had  fed  her  kids.  This  doe  and another  one  who  came  in  last  were  the  friends — sakhis— or  the  playmates  of  the  first  doe  in  heaven and  were  condemned  to  become  deers  along  with their  friend.Now,  each  deer  before  getting  leave  had  dis coursed  on  some  spiritual  matters  and  one  of  them had  gone  to  the  extent  of  graduating  and  appraising the  sin  of  killing.  For  example,  one  said  : —
The  killing  of  10  goats  =  The  killing  of  1 ox.
The  killing  of 100  men  =The  killing  of 1  brahmin.
The  killing  of 100  brahmins  =The  killing  of 1  good  woman.
The  killing  of 100  women  = The  killing  of 1  preg.  woman.
The  killing  of 10  pregnant women  = The  killing  of 1  cow.
The  hunter’s  whole  night  was  taken  up  by such  discourses  and  talks  on  spiritual  matters. In  the  morning  the  four  turned  up  as  promised but  he  declined  to  kill  them  saying,  “You  are blessed,  how  can  I  kill  you  after  your  telling  me so  many  good  things,  especially  after  telling  me about  the  sin  of  taking  life.”
So  the  man  had  been  kept  awake  the  whole night — one  of  the  essentials  of  Shiva’s  worship ; the  essentials  being  the  repeating  of  Shiva’s  name, worship  of  ‘pindi’  with  water,  bel-leaves,  keeping fast,  of  sitting  up  the  whole  night,  listening  to spiritual  talks  or  reading  religious  books  about Shiva.
As  his  sins  were  now  forgiven  he  began  to have  an  intense  desire  to  see  God,  and  as  a  result of  which  some  say  he  died  immediately  and  got Moksha,  while  others  say  that  he  lived  as  a  Bhag- vata  or  Sadhu  for  many  years  afterwards.  The writer  is  also  told  that  immediately  after  his  craving to  see  God,  Shiva  himself  came  down  on  an  ‘udan khatola’  or  flying  cot  (aeroplane)  and  took  him up  and  invested  him  in  heaven  with  godhood.
On  Shivaratri  people  should  keep  twenty-four hours  fast — fruits  and  milk  may  be  taken  but serious  fast-keepers  do  not  drink  even  water.  Men stay  awake  the  whole  night  and  read  or  listen  to stories  about  Shiva,  so do  women ;  but  they generally  go  off  to  sleep! All  rise  early,  bathe  and  go  to  the  temple. They  have  to  worship  three  times  that  day.  Men must  go  to  the  temple  with  Dindi,  i.e.,  with  cymbals, tom-toms  along  with  men  singing  in  praise  of  Shiva. Though  women  too  go  singing,  they  are  not accompanied  by  musical  instruments.
Worshippers  carry  with  them  in  brass  plates the  following  materials  of  worship : — Sandalwood paste,  rice,  turmeric,  red  powder,  wood  apple  or bel-leaves,  flowers,  udbatti,  incense,  camphor  and water.
As  soon  as  they  enter  into  the  temple,  the Brahmins  take  charge  and  instruct  them  as  to  the method  of  worship.  They  recite  the  mantras  as they  drop  the  leaves  on  the  Tinga,  and  recite  all the  names  of  Shiva.  Generally,  the  women  go separately  from  the  men,  and  worship  separately in  the  temple  ;  but  this  may  not  be  true  in  all  places.
Though  the  ‘linga, — phallus — has  been  taken  as a  symbol  of  the  creative  power  of  Nature,  yet  the majority  of  the  people  cannot  be  expected  to  think in  this  strain,  and  not  one  in  ten  thousand  even cares  to  know  about  this  ‘higher  meaning.  At  the same  time,  to  the  minds  of  the  unacquainted  the Tinga  does  not  suggest  obscene  notions.
Shiva  is  supposed  to  be  everywhere.  His  head is  in  the  heavens,  his  upper  body  in  the  space between  heaven  and  earth,  his  ‘linga  in  the  middle, i.e,,  on  the  earth  where  it  is  considered  very  sacred, his  feet  are  in  the  Fatal,  the  nether-world.  His ‘linga  has  no  beginning  and  no  end  as  discovered both  by  Brahma  and  Vishnu.  Both  of  these  were set  the  task  of  finding  out  the  end  of  Tinga.  Some say  they  were  asked  to  find  the  head  and  the  feet of  Shiva  respectively.  Brahma  rode  upon  his  swan and  flew  up  to  heaven  and  Vishnu  went  down  to the  nether-world  upon  his  tortoise.  While  Vishnu told  the  truth  about  his  inability  to  find  the  end, Brahma  lied  and  said  that  he  had  found  it  and brought  the  Ketki  flower,  declaring  it  was  fixed on  the  tip  of  it.  So  Vishnu  was  blessed  and  invested with  new  rights  and  privileges  ;  Brahma  was  cursed and  was  declared  un-worshippable.
It  is  commonly  believed  in Maharashtra that,  from  Shivratri  the  day  increases  ‘shivl  by  shivl’ as  from  Til  Sankrat  it  increases  til  by  til  (=  minute oil  seed).  Shivl  is  the  peg  which  is  fixed  in  the yoke  of  an  oxen  team  to  keep  their  heads  from slipping  out.
The  low  caste  people  who  have  no  temples  of their  own  have  to  worship  Shiva  at  home.  The author  saw  a  well-to-do  low  caste  Hindu  worship ping  in  an  enclosure  made  by  four  cots.  Inside he  had  made  a  tiny  Pindal— ‘a  sort  of  raised  ground — surrounded  on  four  sides  with  strings  of  fresh mango  leaves.  It  had  a  tiny  gate  also.  In  front of  it  five  leaves  were  hung  apart  ;  underneath  each of  them  was  placed  one  earthenware  saucer,  one earthenware  lamp  burning  clarified  butter,  half  a cocoanut  and  then  there  w-ere  flowers  and  garlands. He  had  beside  him  a  big  brass  plate  containing food  prepared  that  morning.  Rice,  dal  (pulse), good  preparations  made  of  flour  fried  in  ghee — sweet  and  salty — two  kinds  of  vegetables.  He would  put  in  the  different  saucers  a  little quantity  of  the  contents  and  then  bow  before  them with  folded  hands  and  shout  “Har  bolo”  and  two or  three  members  of  his  family  inside  the  enclosure along  with  the  spectators  standing  'all  around  the cots  would  shout  in  response  in  a  most  religious manner  “Mahadeo’’.  (Har  another  name  for  Shiva, bolo  =  speak.)  Mahadeo  also  is  one  of  Shiva’s names.  He  would  ask  them  to  shout  the  god’s names  after  every  such  action,  and  the  youngsters standing  all  round  would  never  lag  behind  in shouting  at  the  top  of  their  voices  in  response  to his  requests.  The  man  had  arranged  before  him six  pieces  of  stone,  five  arranged  in  a  straight  line and  one  opposite  to  the  line,  The  man  on  being asked  could  not  account  for  the  stones,  nor  any  one of  the  others  who  were  standing  all  round  the  cots  ; though  he  did  say  that  the  stone  placed  separately represents  Kala  Kotwal  (=»the  black  watchman) or  Bhairva.  He  could  not  say  who  or  what  he  was, some  remarked  that  people  were  afraid  of  him.
After  the  worship  was  over,  the  man  broke the  half  coconut  into  pieces  and  distributed it to the  youngsters  and  women  standing  around.
They  accepted  it  most  reverently  and  ate  it. After  that he  dismantled  the  temporary  temple  and got  up.
The  most  curious  thing  the  author  observed during  the  worship  was  that  the  man  was  not  at  all serious.  He  was  laughing  and  smiling,  talking  to the  on-lookers,  answering  the  author’s  enquiries that  were  addressed  to  the  people  standing  about; and  he  would  abuse  the  boys  roundly  if,  on  account of  the  rush  behind,  they  happened  to  push  or  shake the  cots  a  little  ;  and  he  would  use,  to  the  great amusement  of  all,  the  name  of  Mahadeo  and  his ‘linga  in  an  unpleasantly  suggestive  manner.  He performed  this  worship  on  the  morning  after Shivaratri.
In  many  of  the  villages  of  the  Punjab  and  the U.  P.  one  may  find  small  chest-like  tiny  houses on  the  roadside  or  outside  the  village  or  near  the common  well  (in  many  places  much  bigger  also) containing  within  them  either  the  images  of lingas  or  broken,  raised  and  embossed,  shapeless figures  (coloured  red)  and  if  asked,  people  will describe  them  as  ‘Mahadeo  ka  thara  or  ‘Mahadeo ka  asthan  (the  place,  or  temple  of  the  Mahadeo).
Outside  on  the  wall  one  may  find  painted the  figure  of  a  bull.  The  bull  is  the  animal  on  which he  usually  rides.