TIL  SANKRANT
This  festival  has  no  fixed  date,  but  it  generally falls  in  the  month  of  January  ;  though  in  some respects,  its  significance  is  equivalent  to  that of  the  21st  December,  when  the  season  changes and  the  days  begin  to  lengthen.  It  is  believed  that from  this  date day  begins  in  the  regions  of  the  gods, and  Night  in  the  realms  of  the  rakshasas  (demons). Since  the  gods  enjoy  daylight  from  this  day,  we  feel happy  with  them,  and  celebrate  this  day  as  a  festival. The  word  Sankrant  ”  means  crossing.  On  this  day the  sun  finishes  the  crossing  of  ‘  Dhan  Rasi  ’  and begins  to  cross  ‘Makar  Rasi.  Hence  this  festival is  also  called  the  Makar  Sankrant.  Again,  Sankranti is  considered  to  be  a  goddess  who  from  this  day begins  her  journey  over  the  world  in  order  to  destroy evil  in  it.  Hence  this  festival  is  mostly  performed  by females.  They  go  to  one  another’s  houses,  inter change  new  products  of  the  earth,  such  as  til,  sugar cane,  plums,  etc.,  etc.,  and  ask  one  another  to  remain always  on  friendly  terms.  This  is  called  Oti  Bharan. They  say  “  mitha  mitha  khao  aur  mitha  mitha  bolo “(Here,  take)  and  eat  (these)  sweet  things  and  talk sweetly” ;  (that  is,  be  a  sweet-tempered  lady).  It  is commonly  believed  that  the  things  which  she,  the goddess,  receives  become  either  dear,  or  are destroyed.
The  reason  why  it  is  called  ‘  Til  Sankrant    is that  from  this  day,  days  begin  to  grow  longer  and increase  ‘til  by  til  ’  ; — ‘  til  ’  being  a  very  minute  seed called  in  English  ‘sesamum’.  People  give  each other  til  seeds,  plain  or  mixed  with  jaggery  or  made into  some  sort  of  preparation.  There  are  scores  of ways  in  which  til  can  be  utilized  in  making  different sorts  of  pastries.
As  has  been  mentioned  above,  this  is  mostly  a women’s  festival.  Just  as  on  Dasehra  day,  the  men present  each  other  with  leaves  of  shami  tree  (which is  considered  as  veritable  ‘gold’),  with  the  idea  of creating  friendship  or  cementing  more  strongly  their already  existing  friendships  ;  so  on  this  day,  women give  each  other  til  with  the  same  purpose  in  view. Fruits  and  vegetables  of  the  season  are  also  exchanged.  Men  too  similarly  exchange  til  with  their  men friends.
But  before  we  proceed  further,  let  us  see  who  or what  Sankrant is.  Sankrant  is  believed  to  be  a goddess,  having  large  and  protruding  eyes,  loose  and long  hair,  and  wearing  a  long  flowing  garb  made  of one  piece,  of  one  material,  and  of  one  colour. According  to  the  astrologers,  every  year  on  this  day, at  a  given  time,  she  passes  in  flight  from  one  quarter of  the  earth  to  the  other,  say,  from  north  to  south  or
vice  versa  or  west  to  east  or  vice  versa.  Every  year the  colour  of  her  dress  changes  ;  similarly,  the  animal on  which  she  rides  changes  from  year  to  year.  I  am informed  that  in  the  year  1925,  she  had  a  white  dress on  and  rode  on  a  tiger;  tlie  year  before  a  yellow dress  and  a  donkey  to  ride  upon  ;  and  so  on.  It  is believed  that  all  cloth  of  the  colour  which  she  wears in  a  particular  year  will  be  very  dear  during  the year ;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  what  she  eats — grains  and  fruits,  etc.  She  is  fond  of  eating  wheat, and  fruits  she  does  not  despise.  Moreover,  woe  be to  the  quarter  towards  which  she  keeps  looking  while passing  from  one  quarter  to  the  other,  and  to  those who  dwell  in  that  quarter.  It  is  her  wont  to  keep gazing  in  one  direction  through  her  entire  flight  from one  corner  of  the  Universe  to  the  other.  While going  from  north  to  south  she  may  be  looking  in quite  a  different  direction ;  she  may  be  looking towards  one  of  the  four  sides.  Hence  the  great anxiety  felt  by  the  people  about  the  direction  to which  she  keeps  staring  while  flying  over.  It  is strongly  believed  that  her  glance  brings  great  distress  and  calamity.  Most  unfortunately,  this  year, she  looked  again  towards  the  west  1  Poor  West,  it has  had  enough  of  disasters  !  but  the  goddess  wants excitement  and  sensation  ;  and  for  such  things, surely  she  looked  in  the  right  direction  when  she looked  towards  the  west  1  Yet  no  one  knows  her abode — she  goes  round  the  world  and  back  into  the place  from  where  she  started.
The  term  ‘  Sankranti    is  sometimes  used  as  a term  for  a  quarrelsome  woman  who  is  constantly abusing  others  loudly,  and  quarrelling  in  a  great  rage, with  her  hair  loose  and  falling  on  shoulders,  her  eyes protruding  with  anger,  and  that  end  of  the  sari  which covers  the  shoulders  hanging  down  and  touching  the ground.
On  ‘  Til  Sankrant  ’  the  men  must  stay  out  for a  long  time,  in  fact,  the  whole  day,  as  women  go  in groups  from  house  to  house  to  see  their  friends  if invited.  Generally  every  woman  is  invited,  and friends  are  pressed  to  come  and  pay  a  visit  which is  considered  a  great  honour.  It  is  of  course  understood  that  the  linen-folk  cannot  stay  at  home  when the  wives  and  the  sisters  of  other  people  are  in. Therefore  out  of  courtesy  the  men  go  out,  and  busy themselves  with  some  thing  or  other.  They  manage to  pass  the  time  either  watching  the  races — bullock cart  races— or  cock  fighting,  wrestling,  etc.,  etc.,  the younger  ones  are  busy  kite-flying.  It  is  at  this  time in  the  bazars  or  in  some  meeting  places,  that  the  men present  each  other  with  til.  Fruits  or  other  such things  are  not  exchanged.  The  men  bow  to  each other  with  folded  hands  or  in  any  other  recognized way  and  wish  each  other  something  good.  The  tips which  the  writer  was  offered  by  his  many  friends on  this  day  were  mixed  with  jaggery  and  made  into different  kinds  of  palatable  preparations.  While some  were  sugar-coated  and  made  into  lumps  of different  sizes  and  of  different  colours — the  others^ were  made  like  doughnuts- — they  were  either  made into  small  balls  or  were  shaped  in  all  sorts  of  odd designs.
On  ‘Til  Sankrant  the  women-folk  rise  early  in the  morning,  to  do  all  the  house-cleaning  and  scouring  of  utensils.  The  daughter-in-law  washes  the  feet of  the  mother-in-law  or  of  any  other  elderly  lady  in the  house  in  order  to  gain  her  love.  After  making any  food  if  required  (though  most  of  the  things  are made  the  previous  day,  and  on  this  day  nothing  is eaten  which  does  not  contain  til  and  jaggery,  and no  fast  is  kept  this  day),  the  women  take  their bath,  oil  their  hair,  put  in  a  few  flowers  in  their  hair- knots,  and  clothe  themselves  in  their  prettiest  saris; then,  adorned  with  all  the  ornaments  they  possess, they  leave  their  houses  and  go  in  groups  from  house to  house.  A  carpet  or  durrie  is  spread  on  the  ground (though  this  is  hardly  necessary,  as  the  floor  is always  so  clean  and  so  nicely  and  freshly  plastered, that  there  is  absolutely  no  fear  of  clothes  being soiled)  and  they  sit  on  it  in  a  circle.  They  exchange with  each  other  vegetables  and  fruits  of  the  season, such  as  carrots,  peas,  guavas,  mangoes,  plums, sugarcanes,  etc.  etc.
The  fruits  are  not  exchanged  uncovered.  As mentioned  above,  they  are  put  in  a  new  earthenware vessel,  and  covered  with  one  end  of  the  sari  of  the giver,  and  then  passed  from  one  cover  to  the  other without  being  seen  by  either  giver  or  receiver.  Moreover,  they  are  not  seen  even  after  the  exchange  has been  effected  under  the  cover  of  the  saris;  for  they should  be  taken  home  covered,  and  only  then  disclosed  to  view.  This  is  supposed  to  show  that  the giver  and  the  receiver  do  not  pay  any  regard  as  to what  the  fruits  are  worth  in  terms  of  money,  but  that they  care  more  for  the  spirit  of  friendship  in  which they  are  given.  They  are  priceless  also;  for  it  is  said that  the  thing  in  a  closed  hand  (of  the  contents  of which  you  have  no  knowledge)  may  be  worth Rs.  1,25,000  !  In  other  words  it  is  ‘unmol’  or  priceless.
They  present  each  other  with  new  earthenware vessels,  mark  each  other  on  the  forehead  with  red powder,  wishing  ‘long  life’  for  each  other’s  husband. Even  the  young  unmarried  girls  go  through  the  whole ceremony,  in  anticipation  of  a  coming  happy  married life.  If  you  watch  them  sitting  there  you  will  see that  they  are  not  quiet  even  for  a  single  second. They  are  chatting,  joking,  laughing  and  coughing loudly,  and  the  young  ones  add  their  quota  by  crying. One  observes  in  that  company  great  joy  and  happiness.
Now,  as  all  this  is  going  on,  quite  suddenly  a mother  gets  up  and  announces  that  she  is  going  to do  her  ‘chhokri  ki  lut’  (the  loot  of  her  girl).  All  are ready,  and  the  woman  who  announces  this  makes  her girl  stand  in  the  middle  of  the  group,  and  takes  many handfuls  of  different  fruits  and  lets  them  fall  gently off  the  head  of  the  girl.  The  women  rush  for  the fruits  so  dropped  on  the  ground ;  and  one  can  imagine the  rush,  the  excitement,,  the  jollity,  and  the  laughs and  smiles  that  result  from  such  an  innocent  performance.  After  they  have  gone  through  a  few  of such  loots  they  sit  down  and  then  jokes  are  cracked, and  pleasant  memories  and  similar  occasions  are called.
When  they  think  it  is  time  that  they  should move  on,  they  do  so  and  go  from  house  to  house  until they  have  paid  all  the  calls,  thus  new  acquaintances are  formed,  and  existing  friendship  cemented  till  the day  is  over.  In  the  evening,  particular  male  friends of  the  husband  are  invited  for  dinner  (or  more  often breakfast)  and  then  all  is  quiet  again.
But  darkness  does  not  cover  the  land  without the  inevitable  Brahmans  and  beggars  being  fed.  It  is in  the  forenoon  that  these  men  go  from  door  to  door, with  full  knowledge  of  what  they  will  get.  At  every house  they  get  ‘khichri’  [rice  and  dall  (pulse)  mixed together,  fried  in  clarified  butter  and  then  boiled  in water  until  it  is  evaporated,  and  seasoned  with  salt] and  ‘laddus/  til  balls  made  by  mixing  til  and  jaggery. The  beggars  are  just  as  omnipresent  as  the  Brah mans  I
Very  recently  the  author  had  an  occasion  to entertain  the  Mahar  women  of  a  locality  on  Til  San- krant  Day.  There  were about  eighty  to  a hundred  women,  who  were  dressed  in  their  best  sarees and  bedecked  with  jewels.  There  were  only  three  men of  their  caste  present  to  help  the  author  in  making the  necessary  ‘bandobast'.  The  author  presided  at the  function,  though  ordinarily  men  are  not  allowed to  come  into  a  group  of  women  observing  this  festival. In  fact,  on  this  occasion  those  men  who  also wanted  to  come  in — they  had  their  wives  and  sisters among  them — were  turned  out  summarily  by  some  of the  women  themselves.  After  running  the  gram phone  for  some  time,  the  calm  and  serene-looking women  immediately  fell  to  talking  and  laughing loudly,  and  cracking  jokes  with  each  other.  After having  their  fill  of  laughter  and  mirth,  an  elderly woman  got  up  with  a  glittering  brass  plate  in  her hand  containing  red  powder ;  and  from  one  end started  marking  the  women  on  their  foreheads,  rather abruptly  and  rudely  skipping  over  the  widows  sitting in  the  row.  Besides  this  woman,  the  other  women also  besmeared  each  other’s  cheeks  and  foreheads with  the  red  powder,  always  accompanied  as  they did  so  by  pleasant  remarks  and  wishes.  After  this, the  author  had  the  honour  of  being  garlanded  by  them with  a  garland  of  mogra  and  rose,  intertwined  with silvery  threads.  Having  finished  this  part  of  the ceremony,  about  six  women  were  asked  to  distribute fresh  peas,  plums,  big  and  small,  jaggery  and  sesa- mum  seeds  mixed  together,  carrots,  pods  of  different vegetables  and  betel  leaves  and  nuts.  One  of  the distributors  was  a  widow;  but  no  sooner  was  this noticed  that  a  strong  protest  was  raised  against this  procedure  though  not  in  a  rough  manner.  The poor  woman  had  to  sit  down  and  a  woman  with her  husband  living  like  the  others  was  asked  to distribute  the  things.  As  the  things  were  being distributed  the  women  were  busy  laughing  and cracking  jokes  among  each  other.  One  of  the jokes  was asking  a  young  wife  her  husband’s name.  Many  got  after  her.  She  felt  extremely  shy and  certainly  nothing  could  make  her  mention  her husband’s  name.  A  Hindu  woman  not  only  does  not call  her  husband  by  name  but  does  not  even  pronounce  it  in  the  presence  of  others.  On  account  of the  nature  of  the  author’s  work  which  lay  among these  women  he  had  to  take  down  their  children’s fathers’  names  and  it  was  a  job  to  get  the  names  out of  them.  They  would  either  cover  their  faces  due  to shyness  or  they  would  immediately  ask  some  other women  or  men  standing  nearby  to  let  me  know  their husbands’  names.  Ordinarily,  on  the  author’s  asking the  name  of  a  woman’s  husband,  about  ten  people would  immediately  volunteer  to  tell  it,  because  they know  that  a  woman  is  not  expected  to  mention  her husband’s  name.  But  not  infrequently,  many  a woman,  finding  no  one  of  her  community  within  hearing  distance,  has  quietly  and  shyly  pronounced her  husband’s  name!