VATA-SAVITRI.
This  festival  takes  place  in  the  month  of Jesyeth.  Vata  means  Banyan  tree;  and  Savi- tri  is  the  name  of  the  girl  connected  with  the story.
The  origin  of  the  story  is  not  known  nor  even the  author  of  it.  The  tradition  is that  Raja  Prikshitti, who  reigned  in  Delhi — Hastnapur — in  the  remote past,  heard  of  the  story  from  Ganemaejaya,  who  in turn  had  been  told  it  by  his  father  Viyas.  Now, Viyas  was  a  very  learned  man,  and  was  considered an  authority  on  everything  pertaining  to  religion. He  was,  moreover,  the  author  of  some  of  the  Epics (Puranas).
The  story  runs  as  follows  ; — 'When  the  Kashatri King  Ashyopati  Raja  (king  of  horses)  realized  that he  was  not  going  to  be  blessed  with  children,  he  went to  Brahma,  the  Creator,  with  the  request  that  a child  might  be  born  to  him.  Brahma  directed  him to  go  to  his  wife,  who  (he  said)  could  grant  the  boon. His  wife  did  grant  the  boon,  and  in  course  of  time  a daughter  was  born  to  him.  The  child  was  named after  the  name  of  Brahma’s  Queen,  Savitri.  After some  years,  when  Savitri,  the  girl,  grew  up  to  the marriageable  age,  her  father  looked  round  for  a suitable  husband,  but  having  failed  to  obtain  one,  he decided  to  send  the  bride  round  the  world  in  order that  she  might  select  a  bridegroom  for  herself.  In due  time  she  started,  with  processions  of  horses  and palanquins,  with  a  full  retinue  of  officers,  servants  and soldiers.  She  came  across  many  princes  of  ancient houses  possessing  wealth  untold  ;  but  she  could  not see  her  way  to  accepting  any.  One  day  while  still  on her  journey  she  passed  through  a  thick  jungle  where she  saw  a  beautiful  young  man,  Satyawan  by  name, apparently  a  wood-cutter.  She  saw  that  the  man was  looking  after  his  blind  parents  who  were  living in  the  forest.  Greatly  impressed  as  she  was  by  his filial  love  and  devotion,  she  decided  there  and  then that  she  would  marry  him,  and  she  did  so.
Now  Satyawan  was  originally  a  prince  and  heir to  a  throne  which  was  no  longer  his.  It  was  on account  of  the  blindness  of  the  parents  that  their territory  was  invaded  and  annexed  by  a  neighbouring king.  They turned  out  and  were  obliged  to live  in  the  forest  where  Satyawan,  as  a  true  son, looked  after  them  day  and  night.
Narad,  the  great  devotee,  was  a  mischievous fellow  in  the  sense  that  he  delighted  in  annoying and  instigating  quarrels  among  people  by  creating some  trouble  or  other.  He  told  Savitri  that  it  was foreordained  that  Satyawan  should  die  soon.  On hearing  this,  she  requested  him  to  avert  the  fate  but he  would  not  listen.  And  in  fact,  it  so  happened after  a  short  time  that  Satyawan  while  cutting  wood fell  down  from  a  tree  and  breathed  his  last.
Yama,  the  God  of  Death,  came  and  threw  his noose  on  the  neck  of  Satyawan  in  order  to  take  his soul  away.  Savitri,  being  a  very  chaste  girl,  could see  the  invisible  Yama.  She  requested  him  not  to take  his  life  away.  But  he  would  not  pay  any heed  to  her  words.  He  took  Satyav^an’s  life  and started;  but  she  followed  him.  Yama,  being  a god,  could  go  anywhere  ;  but  Savitri,  being  a  human being,  might  not  be  expected  to  have  the  power to  do  so.  But  curiously  enough,  she  did  follow him,  over  dale  and  den,  hills  and  mountains.  Yama
{ Narad  was  a  great  devotee  of  gods,  and  though  he  had  a physical  body,  could  go  about  like  a  spirit  anywhere  in  the  world. He  could  go  even  in  zenana  or  harem  but  he  was  always a Brahmacharya,  who  never  married  and  never  indulged  in  sexual intercourse.  He  may  be  recognized  by  his  lop-hair,  which  always stands  erect,  with  the  rest  of  the  head  clean and cropped.  He  has  a loin-cloth  wrapped  round  his  body,  a  garland  of  flowers  round  his neck,  and  is  always  with  a  ‘sittar’  in  one  hand  and  the  ‘chipliya’ in  the  other.  The  sittar  is  a  kind  of  guitar;  and  the  chipliya  is  a sort  of  musical  instrument,  which  consists  of  a  pa.ir  of  small wooden  blocks,  attached  together  by  means  of  a  tape  or  two, perhaps  two  inches  in  length.  There  is  a  ring  fixed  in  one  block to  fit  into  the  thumb,  and  a  couple  of  rings  on  the  other  for  the fingers,  and  thus  the  blocks  are  struck  against  each  other,  while held  in  the  palm  of  the  hand ;  while  bunches  of  tiny  brass  bells are  attached  to  the  blocks.
Narad  sang  songs  always  in  praise  of  Vishnu  and  could  go in  the  presence  of  all  the  gods,  even  Krishna  offered  him  a  chair!
He  is  also  called  Brahmarishi — The  Great  Sage.} flew  about  in  the  clouds ;  but  so  did  Savitri,  as she  had  gained  the  power  of  flying  because  of  her purity  and  chastity.  Yama  repeatedly  told  her  not to  follow  him,  saying  that  he  was  helpless  in  the matter,  because  he  had  received  orders  from  above. But  she  would  not  listen  to  him,  and  still  followed him  wherever  he  went.  When  Yama  saw  that  there was  no  way  out  he  stopped  and  asked  her  if  she wanted  any  boon  except  the  restoration  of  life  to Satyawan. If  so,  he  would  readily  and  gladly  grant her.  But  Savitri  insisted  on  her  old  demand.  Later on,  Yama,  somehow  or  other,  came  to  promise  her  to grant  her  three  boons.  These  three  boons  did  not include  restoration  of  life  to  Satyawan;  but  were: — 1. the  restoration  of  eye-sight  to  the  parents  of  Satya wan  ;  2.  the  restoration  of  their  kingdom  to  them;  3. the  birth  of  eight  sons  to  Savitri.  Now  the  third boon  meant  that  Satyawan  had  necessarily  to  come to  life,  for  the  procreation  of  the  sons.  So  it  was  by mistake  that  Yama  granted  the  last  boon,  not  realizing  the  consequences  thereof.  He  was  however  so pleased  with  her  fidelity,  that  he  finally  agreed  to grant  Satyawan’s  life.
Satyawan  had  fallen  from  a  banyan  tree;  and this  is  the  reason  why  women  perform  the  worship at  this  tree.
This  ceremony  is  gone  through  by  married women  only  —  mostly  young  wives.  Men  take  no part  in  this  service.
As  for  the  details  of  the  worship,  I  will  describe the  ceremony  as  I  saw  it  in  the  Central  Provinces. This  ceremony  cannot  be  performed  at  home,  as  a Banyan  tree  is  essential.  I  have  heard  people  say that  on  Vata-Savitri  day  it  must  rain;  and  frequently, it  does  rain.  But  on  the  particular  day  on  which I  went  to  see  the  actual  worship  of  the  Banyan  tree, it  did  not  rain,  though  the  day  was  cloudy.  Without paying  the  least  thought  to  the  danger  of  their  costly sarees  and  other  dresses  being  soiled  or  spoiled,  the women  go  out  in  the  mud  and  slush,  in  pouring  rain and  blistering  wind,  in  order  to  perform  the  worship.
On  the  Festival  day,  group  after  group  of women  may  be  seen  passing  down  the  road,  wending their  way  to  the  temple;  all  carrying  brass  plates containing  the  materials  of  worship,  consisting  of some  cotton  thread,  water  in  a  special  receptacle, rice,  sandalwood  paste,  flowers,  a  capsicule  of kneaded  flour  containing  ghee  and  a  cotton  wick, sweets,  and  fruits  of  the  season,  wheat,  cocoanut, betelnuts,  dried  dates,  red  powder,  turmeric,  etc.
While  some  walk  down  quietly,  others  have  in front  some  sort  of  musical  band  playing  Indian tunes.  Many  follow  a  couple  of  men  playing  tom tom  and  a  trumpet  with  a  shrill  sound.  It  is  not unusual  to  see  a  solitary  woman  following  either  a few  bandsmen,  or  possibly a little  old  woman,  weakly striking  a  tom-tom.  It  seems  strange  that  such  a noise  should  draw  attention  to  one  woman  only,  when the  music  leads  one  to  expect  to  see  a  big  procession  of  women, — young,  fair,  or  dignified, — clad  in bright  and  costly  sarees,  with  flowers  in  their  hair.
At  the  place  where  I  watched  the  observance of  the  Festival,  the  temple  is  situated  on  the  right bank  of  a  small  and  narrow  ‘nullah’,  which  is  made pucca  at  this  place  by  the  temple-people,  and  is crossed  by  a  small  wooden  bridge.  The  temple  is thickly  shaded  by  the  trees  surrounding  it,  and especially  the  huge  Banyan  tree.  But  the  temple looks  deserted  this  day ;  as  all  the  Pujaris  and Brahmins  have  crossed  over  to  the  other  side,  to earn  the  fees  so  graciously  given  by  the  young brides.
On  reaching  the  tree,  the  trunk  of  which  is some  50  feet  in  circumference  at  the  base,  one  finds it  surrounded  by  a  number  of  Brahmins  and  the  girls who  have  come  for  worship.
Each  girl  comes  and  sits  down  near  a  Brahmin, and  waits  till  he  has  finished  with  her  predecessor. She  moves  up  near the  tree,  on  the  base  of  which one  will  find  all  the  material  of  worship  left  over by  the  previous  worshippers.  The  girl  has  all  her material  ready ;  and  the  Brahmin  opens  his  few musty  and  brownish  papers  (which  look  as  if  they had  been  saved  from  fire  just  in  time  to  avert  complete  destruction),  handwritten  or  printed  with  some verses  in  Sanskrit.  He  recites  either  orally  or  from those  leaves,  and  as  he  does  so,  he  keeps  instructing the  girl  when  to  throw  the  water  (the  idea  of  which is,  to  give  a  bath  to  the  gods,  just  as  the  Brahmins themselves  bathe  before  taking  meals,  and  also  to wash  the  material  of  worship)  or  flowers  (to  beautify the  place),  or  red  powder,  or  to  light  the  flour-made lamp  burning  the  cotton  wick  in  clarified  butter, fruits,  wheat,  rice,  turmeric,  etc.,  etc.  The  woman makes  a  circle  of  water  round  the  eatables  and  then both  she  and  the  Brahmin  close  their  eyes,  in  order to  let  the  gods  have  the  food.  They  are  not  supposed  to  open  their  eyes  when  the  gods  are  eating, as  this  might  be  instrumental  in  throwing  the  ‘evil eye' on the  food  of  the  gods  and  thus  enrage  them. Similarly,  Brahmins  take  their  meals  in  private,  in order  to  escape  the  ‘evil  eye’  of  a  greedy  fellow. The  gods  are  supposed  to  be  eating  meals  while  the eyes  of  the  worshippers  are  closed.  As  a  rule,  this ceremony  should  take  place  at  12  o’clock  ;  but  I  did not  notice  any  strict  observance  of  the  time.  After this,  both  the  worshippers  rise  and  offer  a  prayer. The  woman  bows  to  the  priest,  and  to  the  tree  three times,  pays  him  a  few  pice  and  some  fruits,  encircles the  tree  with  the  cotton  thread,  going  round  it  7 times,  and  marks  the  tree  with  sandalwood  paste, the  fragrance  of  which  is  supposed  to  cheer  the  souls of  the  gods  This  done,  she  goes  to  her  friends standing  by,  and  wishes  them,  one  by  one,  some  good wish  for  herself,  and  incidentally  for  her  husband also,  and  marks  them  with  red  powder  in  the  fore head  right  above  the  nose.  She  is  also  herself marked  in  the  same  manner  by  them  with  the  same kind  of  wish.  Then  any  fruits  which  were  left  over are  presented  and  exchanged. Before  she  departs, she  distributes  the  rest  to  the  sweepers  and  beggars who  are  waiting  nearby  with  their  baskets,  ready to  receive  them.  This  done  she  departs.  This  puja is  conducted  in  a  solemn  manner  ;  there  is  no  noise, no  confusion  at  the  tree.  Everything  is  quiet,  except the  murmuring  of  the  priest,  low  voices  of  the  girls, and  the  swish  of  the  sarees.  But  at  a  distance,  the harsh  voice  of  the  sweepers  and  beggars  quarrelling over  the  eatables,  might  be  heard.  There  was  a marked  and  conspicuous  absence  of  men  near  the trees,  except  for  the  Brahmins  and  myself.  As  for me,  I  was  all  the  time  nervous  lest  some  graceful lady  should  approach  me  with  fruits,  taking  me  to be  some  “beggar”  waiting  for  them  !  And  I  had the  feeling  of  one  who  was  knowingly  treading  on hallowed  ground.
The  ladies  return  to their  homes  in  the  same manner  as  they  came,  that  is,  with  music,  etc. ;  and with  an  air  of  satisfaction  in  their  eyes.
At  four  in  the  afternoon,  the  ladies  again  gather together,  this  time  in  a  house ;  and  a  matron  who is  expected  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  story  of Savitri  recites  it  in  a  sing-song  manner.  This  is highly  appreciated  and  patiently  listened  to.  I  once heard  a  good  old  lady  reciting  it  whose  voice  was a  little  hoarse,  and  her  laughter  sounded  like  the flipping  of  a  raven’s  wings;  but  she  put  life  into the  whole  thing.  Her  voice  would  rise  alternately in  cadence  of  sorrow  and  of  joy,  of  pity  and  astonishment.  The  women  sat  round  with  babies  in  their laps.  The  women  have  to  keep  fast  from  6  a.m.  to 6  a.m.  of  the  next  day;  but  their  fast  is  not  as  strict as  that  of  the  Mohammedans;  for  they  are  allowed to  take  fruits  and  milk,  but  not  grains  or  things which  contain  grains.